CHARLES NODIER


“As a writer, Nodier perhaps deserves the first rank among
contemporary authors. His style is a model of clarity,
of sustained elegance and above all of excessive purity. It is
hard to imagine more correction and at the same time more
easy to bend to all sounds, to meet all needs
of passion. By turns severe, sad, pleasant, terrible,
light, it is a style that cannot be studied with too much care and
attention. Nodier has a way of his own; Nodier made school, and
pupils and pupils worthy of him, and whom the public loves,
knows, esteem, and that we will not name here, for the sake of
the modesty of the master first of all, and perhaps also of his pupils. "


Jules Janin.


(Extract from a notice of the 1832 edition).




Jean Sbogar


Jean Sbogar




The people I know would probably exempt me
without sorrow to declare that this new edition of a few
weak works deeply forgotten by the public is not a
vanity speculation. Age is advancing for me; but i am still
far from that epoch of happy oblivion when old age, returned to
children's games, playful rattles which amused the cradle.
This late publication is the simple effect of a convenience of
bookstore, and the reasons I have for desiring its success have
no relation to the claims of talent and the expectations of
glory.


After these oratorical precautions of a prudent modesty which leaves
perhaps pierce some pride, like the holes in the mantle of a
philosopher, will I be allowed to speak of these resurrected writings
by the press as if they still really existed in the
memory of their former readers? Why not, if he comes out of this
complacent return of the mind of a writer to the nothings of his
youth, a small number of anecdotes that are worth reading
when you have nothing better to do? In this broadcast time
universal, the authors of Memoires et de Souvenirs
often the occasion to notice that he attached some charm to
personality, and the mind, tired of immense emotions,
willingly took refuge in the narrow sphere of the small
individual impressions. Besides these prefaces are made
for those who read my novels and willing, I think, to myself
forgive my prefaces.


I will not say what circumstances made me decide to publish in
1818 the novel by Jean Sbogar, drafted in 1812 at the places that
inspired. It will suffice for me to note in passing that I was entering then
in a very serious career where I took only one step, and that
this consideration forbade me to attach my name to
frontispiece. Jean Sbogar's policy would indeed have been a
bad recommendation for the man who was going to profess
political science in the little Tartane; and nobody
will be surprised that the author, recognized despite his precautions, was there
blacklisted like his book. We can judge the rest by
the timeliness of this publication in the high spirit of convenience and
of aptitude to the interested concessions which directed me in all
the big business of my life.


The success compensated me a little this time for the vicissitudes of
favor. The anonymous brought me luck in the newspapers where we have
always quite willingly tolerated the passing vogue of a writing
again, when it does not affect a reputation.
The impression of a moment that this trifle produced was
moreover very foreign to the intrinsic merit of the book. She
resulted from the general disposition of minds that the
events of previous years had gradually brought back to
doctrines of liberty, and the character of my hero had
allowed to bring to their last expression the theories of which I
am far from fully accepting responsibility. She was
serious then, and would perhaps be more serious today if the
proletarians read novels. I am happy to think that
progress of civilization have not yet come to this, and that
the reveries of my Gracchus de Spalato will no longer exercise
influence until further notice on learned societies that
those of the God that we adored in the rue Taitbout.


However, my two-volume brochure must have carried some
imprint of a man's character, since only one man was found
to whom to attribute it, and that it was (I humbly apologize to
his noble memory) my illustrious friend Benjamin Constant. Of
journalists who believed themselves better informed, and whom I had deceived
do not know what mixture of asceticism of love and philanthropy
desperate who merge into this bluette, accused Mme.
of Krudener, who was not a man, and who was beginning to
more sex. I did not intervene in this fight which could not
last long. Adolphe and Valerie answered for their
authors.


Here I am at the story of the most brilliant of my successes, and
I can hardly be wrong, because I am not dazzled by the
amount. I'm telling facts, and that's enough to put my mind
humility at ease. I think I said somewhere that
preface was a work of pride; I repeat it willingly.
Innocent pride, moreover, and almost worthy of a tender
compassion, let him who relies on the sound of a little book,
and which lasts just long enough to escort him from the store under the
pestle, while waiting for it to undergo a new metamorphosis in
the molds of the card maker! old Marie de Gournay, worthy daughter
alliance of Montaigne, wonderfully expressed my thoughts in
a sublime verse that would appeal to our young and brilliant poets


Man is the shadow of a dream, and his work is his shadow.


In truth, Jean Sbogar is only my shadow, at most, where I
am greatly mistaken about my poor place in the sun.


The name of the author of Jean Sbogar returned to Paris from Saint Helena.
It's not the longest of my travels, but it's the Odyssey of
my fame. We will never catch her flying so far. Napoleon,
whose literary taste was not of course, witness his
predilection for Macpherson's epic deceptions, and for
the Homeric pastiche of Luce de Lancival, took care of Jean Sbogar
for two days. The English newspapers announced that he had
spent a night reading it, and a few hours writing it down on a
copy which has remained, as I have often been told, in
hands of General Gourgaud. As for the memory of my name, it does
would not be quite necessary to assume he had it
preserved, to attribute to him the power of memory of Caesar, who
called, each by his own, the forty thousand soldiers of whom he
was accompanied to the plains of Pharsalia. If Napoleon believed
really, as he dictated to his chroniclers, that he
be made, under his reign, that twenty-six arrests without warrant
judicial and without nuts, on letters of seal bearing its
imperial signature, I could well have been there. This
peculiarity is explained, fortunately, in an even more
natural, by a very simple fact. One of Napoleon's friends,
Saint Helena, had been mine, in Paris, in 1814, and he knew
the story of Jean Sbogar, in a time when I did not think of
finish it off. I am proud, but I am sincere; such a
circumstance flaps much of the illustration that would result for
me to have been guessed by Napoleon, and I would have given up
willingly to this equivocal title of glory, if I had been allowed
to harm my editor.


Be that as it may, this apostille, coming from high places, excited
probably a moment of rumor in the editorial office of
Bonapartist soap operas in which I did not enjoy a great
credit. I guess it was at first a pretty serious question that
to know if the author of Jean Sbogar had gained some
thing in capacity, or if Napoleon had fallen in childhood. Like him
was not my destiny to be weighed in such a scale,
today I have some modesty to say it. While there
reflective, the editors who were clever people, and who
have since proved it superbly, an average party agreed.
It was decided that nothing is invented in literature, which is all
in fact my opinion; that this is more especially forbidden than
no one to writers who are not from the Academy, which I
admit not so exclusively, and that any man who
had dared to compose Jean Sbogar would be convinced of having stolen it.
This resolution passed, I must say, unanimously. The
king's attorney did not inform. He had a good game, however.


Byron just appeared, in French, in the middle of the discussion,
and we suddenly realized, so deep are the
insights of malice, which my unfortunate thief had
been stolen from the Corsair. It is true that Jean Sbogar had four or
five years older than its senior inventor; but we don't look at it
so close when arguing with the lamb. Criticism has a good
side. I read Byron, whom I barely knew to have it
heard Madame de Stael named two or three times. I read it
often since with an admiration for which he is not indebted to
my gratitude. The Corsair looks like a lot of things
like everything that will be written by the end of the centuries. He had me
was impossible, and I compliment Byron on him
find the slightest connection with Jean Sbogar. Certainly, this
was not the case to say, in any sense possible, that
fine minds meet. If I had been Byron I would have
filed a complaint. Byron, who knew French precisely as I
know English, did not complain. He died without having
open neither Jean Sbogar, nor the newspapers where it is question, and
that is not what he died of.


I didn't complain either. The bibliography had me well
some obligations. I had never seriously cared that
of her, and since it is her business to clarify the dates and
right literary wrongs, I hoped she would avenge me,
if ever, bibliography and I, we arrive side by side
before posterity. It was then that was printed, on a
beautiful paper, and decorated with the anchor frontispiece
scientist from Aldes, the excellent Library Catalog
of an amateur. The learned and ingenious author was careful not to let me
reproach for stealing Byron; he was too strong for that on the
synchronism of books, and he estimated at their price these nonsense,
good at most for the scholarship of a newspaper; but after
having done justice to this bitter-sweet controversy, to which he
probably forgot that I had not competed, he told me
thief in his capacity as juror-critic. There was only the name of the
stole from changed. You tell me thieves don't know
always the names of the people they steal; but you might be
as embarrassed as I am if you were accused of stealing Zchocke.


This note much more bittersweet, to put it mildly
bitter, that my controversy, which I had never thought of,
sank into cruel consternation. I found myself reached and
convinced, in a book endowed with the principle of life, of the crime of having
stole Zchocke, I who would not want to steal anyone in the world, even
Zchocke, I who did not know Zchocke, although he had been
translated by Lamartelière, and that it was found from the said translation
of said Zchocke a vellum paper copy with blue morocco back
in the library of M. Renouard; me who was not worthy of
to know Zchocke in 1815, since I did not know Byron!
I went everywhere to ask for news of Zchocke. To the devil who
had yes speak of Zchocke! I was finally starting to persuade myself
that Zchocke's play only existed in one copy, which
held its place with M. Renouard, among so many other precious
rarities, when my good friend, M. de Pixerecourt, told me that
Zchocke was indeed the author of a drama which had no
relationship with Jean Sbogar, and of which he had composed a
melodrama that was a hundred times better than Jean Sbogar and the drama
from Zchocke. I couldn't believe it, but I didn't want to
to judge that pieces in hand, so much I had at heart, in my innocence
literary, not to have plundered Zchocke.


I finally find him. What humiliation, great God! First,
my hero is called Jean Sbogar, that of Zchocke, Abelino; and my
learned colleague at the old Celtic Academy, Eloi Johanneau,
will prove to you when you want it is literally the same
thing. Second, Abelino is a great lord who makes himself
pass for a bandit, and Jean Sbogar a bandit who pretends
for a great lord. Plagiarism becomes sensitive.
Third, Abelino is married to the richest heiress of
the Republic, and Jean Sbogar refuses to marry the young girl
whom he loves, for fear of staining her with his infamy. Theft is
blatant. Fourth, Abelino saves his country by betraying the
faith he swore to thieves; and Jean Sbogar, who did not wear his
seen that at liberty or on the scaffold, march to death with its
companions. Here the effrontery of the theft goes as far as impudence. Finally
the two actions take place in Venice, where we had never had
the idea of ​​placing another romantic action, and it is, for this
times, as if you were taking my hand in Zchocke's pocket!


I am very sensitive to that part of literary criticism which
involves moral issues. I had nothing to do with
Zchocke, but it seemed to me that everyone could say in me
seeing pass: Here is the plagiarist of Zchocke. I had learned that
Zchocke was one of those eminent talents that you don't meet
often on the road to reputations, and on that road
I was sure of my alibi; but that did not reassure me.
I had visions of Zchocke and Abelino. I had
nightmares of Abelino and Zchocke; I made a big illness
from which I was only saved by the feeling of my virtue. I held
indeed a great consolation in store in the forum
inside my unjustly suspected conscience; is that I
had not needed to take Jean Sbogar from anyone, since I
randomly owed the little envied advantage, to all appearances of
to have known him rather particularly.


While I was thinking about it, something very strange happened
; is that they forgot my book as completely as if it had not
never appeared. I had to resolve to keep my defense for the
third edition. Today, Jean Sbogar is back, and he
It may be a question until tomorrow, I see myself obliged to
declare that no one in the world has any plagiarism to impute to me in
this affair, if not, perhaps, the clerk of the
Laybach in Carniola, the honest M. Repisitch, who was kind enough to
give in time, the documents of the procedure in communication
in order to correct some enslaved Germanisms of which he
feared that he had sometimes been guilty in the heat of
writing. I further protest that all I have taken in
his file is reduced to certain facts that I could not have
better to invent, when I would have been Zchocke, and there is nothing
in my heart that reproaches me for having wronged him with just one
forms of his style, this good Mr. Repisitch being very stubborn on
the classic of the graft, which is not that of the novel.


We will tell you in Istria, Croatia, Dalmatia, when you
take the trouble to extract information that I do not have
made a great effort of mind to invent the name of Jean Sbogar.
My main character was called or was called Jean
Sbogar, and I presume that the little children of the Gulf of
Trieste would attest it to you as well as I did, because the names of
leaders of thieves has the same privilege as that of conquerors
: we remember them everywhere they went. The court of Justice
which condemned it was chaired by M. le Comte Spalatin. The judges
that I remember were M. de Koupferschein and M. de Giscelon;
the high functions of the prosecution were exercised with
all the power of a young and precious talent, by M. Desclaux,
Imperial Attorney General, who now holds a place
distinguished among the lawyers of the Court of Cassation, and who
would gladly defend, if I needed his help last
spring, from the wicked imputation of having taken Jean Sbogar in
a Zchocke tragedy. He knows I found him ready-made.


However, Jean Sbogar was only noticed by the tribunal by this
more than human expression of physiognomy which was the
characteristic of his report, and which made him hold
the expression of Schiller, the angel, the devil and the god.
The moral interest of his defense was to die under the name
obscure of a simple Morlaque adventurer, by evading any
identity with the dazzling menechism whose dishonor was to
offend all his friendships and wither all his loves. He ... not
answered the questions of its judges only in the affirmative or
negative slave, and if he almost betrayed himself, it was only
the reading of the capital judgment, pronounced in French, which
only a vulgar bandit struck in him. The night was advancing to the point
that they had just been obliged to bring torches. I was
standing against his bench; I noticed he was listening to this
language he had refused to understand, and that a look of joy
lit up his eyes, when he could recognize by the text of the
conviction that she had excluded the facts relating to her
pseudonymies from Germany and Italy. This radiant gaze of
happiness, maybe I intercepted it, because it was out of the question
to the parquet floor. That's why I wrote a short story called John
Sbogar. I could have stuck, for my justification, to these
scraps of the biography of a thief, who left some
remembrance of a hundred thousand living witnesses; but my love for
the anecdote is able to take me further, if you want me
to follow, and I am all the more willing to do so as the public
I might worry about the dimension of Jean Sbogar, in
which he has the right to demand a reasonable volume. It is true
that I didn't promise him so much.


The conviction of Jean Sbogar was a legal fact to which he did not
lacked that the material sanction of an execution of blood; But
the flirtatious ceremonial of our philanthropic codes required a
unknown device in the country. It was therefore necessary that Jean Sbogar
resigned to imploring in his dungeon on the day of deliverance when a
carpenter of the city of the Argonauts would manage to raise on
trestles two long parallel posts, and where the tool-maker
carniolan would agree to fit a knife suitable for cutting a
man's head. The trials were so awkward and so miserable,
that they probably forced statesmen to despair of
civilization of Illyria. What is certain is that we
left her a few months later, with little confidence in her
perfectibility of conquered nations. We didn't even have him
left the guillotine!


Jean Sbogar, freed by a judgment in the form of the only
anxiety that would have disturbed his sleep, became more communicative,
and opened without difficulty to the men in whom he believed
be able to place some faith, especially when they offered him the
guarantee until then inviolate of the oaths of Carbonarism. It is
while I saw it two or three times, much higher than
Jean Sbogar whom I tried to paint, and perhaps at all
types of the same character offered by the novel and poetry, since
Captain Laroque de Cervantes, to Charles Moor des
Thieves. He spoke elegantly, and often eloquently, the
French, Italian, German, Modern Greek, and most
of Slavic dialects. Some of the very heterodox sentences
in politics, of which I composed his Tablets, are taken from his
conversation with scrupulous literality. I will add
only a few details to his portrait for readers who
want to know everything, and who do not forgive the new
move away from the historian in the smallest particularities; But
we cannot satisfy all tastes. Haven't I had some
arguing with women for leaving him curls
ears?


Jean Sbogar did not have the hair of this golden blonde who lends a
picturesque beauty more to the graceful heads of the North and
the West. They were roughly copper red, color
highly esteemed in northern Italy, but which is not
Paris, and which I would have all the more difficulty in making understood
charm, that the only comparison that has come to me is a
sacrifice to the conventions of language. She does not express their
shade which varied with the play of light of all the reflections of
ten metals confused in the furnace, from the moment they
blaze over, until they blacken
cooled. We could, however, get an idea of ​​the whim of
colors of their thick and floating tufts when we have seen
the eruption of a volcano from beginning to end. By one
singular oddity of nature, his mustache and beard that he
wearing long in the dungeon were a burnished steel black.


The horse's habit had remarkably arched the legs of
Jean Sbogar, but his bust was so wide, especially at the shoulders,
that we were not surprised that its supports had bent under the
weight. On the contrary, his neck appeared extremely slender towards the
low, perhaps because of its length. He was joking with a
horrible gaiety on this advantage of his conformation, and this
scary banter was such that I prefer to let it guess
than to write it.


The report could not have forgotten the white hand, delicate and
feminine by Jean Sbogar, who contrasted, in truth, with a
extraordinary way with the rest of its slender forms, but
sturdy and almost athletic. I haven't seen a prettier one
; one would have judged by looking at her that she was at most capable
to endure the fourteen jewels that adorn her on the day of her
arrest, which were estimated at eighty thousand francs, and which,
reverence kept for the expert jeweler, were worth
probably more. We wouldn't have suspected, if we had it
seen coming out of the sleeve of a Venetian domino, that she was able to
to support a sword and, much less, to wield it with
dexterity at the head of a squadron; it would however have crumbled,
if she had taken the trouble, bars, bolts,
railings, iron gates.


Something would be missing from the portrait of Jean Sbogar if I did not
sketched the great moral trait: it was a sort of morgue
royal which manifested itself in all her person, in her port,
in his attitudes, in his sovereign gaze, in his disdainful
smile, in his high, abrupt and imperative words, but above all
in the rough and threatening fold that it rolled, dug in furrows,
broke in sharp angles, crossed, so to speak, in lightning
between his eyebrows at the slightest contradiction. This
fierce manifestation of a despotic will would have made me
horror from the height of a throne; but I cannot express how much I
I found it sublime on the straw of the condemned, between the
submissive turnkey who surrounded him like chamberlains, and who
received as graces the orders of the unfortunate that the
justice had just given to the executioner.


One night the prison doors were opened by an event
force majeure, completely foreign to Jean Sbogar and his
troop, and which I will perhaps tell elsewhere if the occasion arises
present, or if you don't get bored of hearing me tell. All
prisoners fled; the concierge disappeared; its employees are
dispersed. At sunrise all the exits were free.
Jean Sbogar was the last to go out and put an old woman to safety.
the judgment had struck with him, and that the system of the prosecution
introduced as his mother, went to pick up his horse at an inn
from the suburb of Cracaw where he had left him, gave him
oats, took the road to Istria, and slept in the evening at Adelsberg;
two days later, he was enveloped in the ancient hovel of Duino,
and the rest went as I said, or so, because I
did not think that the novel was held to the accuracy of the gazette,
and anyone who understands this kind of composition will not be surprised
point that I deleted the superabundant episode of Laybach, despite
its twist, to arrive more quickly at the denouement of Mantua. The
Jean Sbogar died on the scaffold which had drunk, it is said, in six
months, the blood of a thousand of his companions, something difficult to
believe and that I do not guarantee. In Mantua, never carpenters
nor tool makers had failed in the call of authority, when he
it was about preparations for an ordeal. The official instrument of
legal assassination was preserved there by tradition,
immemorial, as in most of the peninsula
italics, which is sufficiently proven to fans of
monuments and humanities of the Middle Ages, by one of the admirable
prints with which Bonasone enriched the tiresome in Bologna in 1555
emblems of the noble Achilles Bocchius, and that bibliomaniacs
look little in the copies retouched in 1574 by
Augustin Carrache. Perfectibility will be fine to say and do;
the guillotine is not of his invention.


The details I just entered are not
completely unknown everywhere. Mr. Percival Gordon, who took the
sentence to translate Jean Sbogar in English, on the first edition,
declares in his preface of 1820 that Jean Sbogar is a character
historical, whose adventurous fame still fills the States
Venetians. At least it wasn't in England that I was blamed
the surreptitious imitation of an English poem which does not lack
popularity, and that consoles me.


I just have to talk about what will distinguish this edition of the
previous ones, and it's more the bookseller's business than mine.
The corrections will be quite numerous; they would be
countless if I had the courage difficult to reread
carefully what I wrote twenty years ago. We will design without
hardly there are many mistakes to be left in a book that
is not the master of destroying everything in one piece. The sky is me
witness that this is the only advantage that makes me regret
today the bad luck of my fortune, carried away in a
larger and more memorable shipwreck than mine. Plectuntur
achivi.


The Tablets are increased by several pages that my friends
had deleted on the first manuscript, in some access
political prudence the motive of which escapes me completely, for I
find them no more foolish and no more furious than the
other. We know what I think of them, and why I give them.


What will result most essential of these long and boring
rantings, it is that Jean Sbogar is neither of Zchocke, nor of
Byron, neither of Benjamin Constant, nor of Mme de Krudener; that he's
is from me; and this was very essential to say for the honor of
Mme de Krudener, Benjamin Constant, Byron and Zchocke.


Charles Nodier.




Jean Sbogar




I


Alas! what is this life where never fails
afflictions and miseries, where everything is full of traps and
enemies! for the chalice of pain is not rather exhausted
let it fill up again; and an enemy is not rather defeated
let others come forward to fight in his stead.

IMITATION OF J.-C.


A little further than the port of Trieste, advancing on the
sea ​​strikes, on the side of the green bay of Pirano, we
finds a small hermitage, long abandoned, which was
formerly under the invocation of Saint Andrew, and who has kept
the name. The shore, which always narrows towards this
place, where it seems to end between the foot of the mountain and
the waves of the Adriatic, seems to gain in beauty as it
loses in extent; an almost impenetrable grove of fig trees and
wild vines, whose fresh gulf vapors maintain
the foliage in a perpetual state of greenery and youth,
surrounds on all sides this house of meditation and
mystery. When the twilight has just passed, and the face
of the sea, slightly rippled by the serene breath of the night,
begins to sway the trembling image of the stars, it is
impossible to express all that there is enchantment in the
silence and the rest of this solitude. You can hardly make out
because of its continuity which makes it like an eternal sigh,
the gentle sound of waters dying on the sand: rarely a
torch which crosses the horizon with the invisible basket of the fisherman
throws on the waves a furrow of light which extends or diminishes
according to the agitation of the sea; she soon disappears behind a
sandbank, and everything falls into darkness. In this beautiful place,
the senses, quite unoccupied, do not disturb any distraction
the thoughts of the soul, it freely takes possession of
space and time, as if they had already ceased to
to enclose for it within the narrow limits of life; and
man, whose heart full of storms opened only to
tumultuous and violent feelings, sometimes understood the
happiness of a deep calm, that nothing threatens, that nothing alters,
by stopping at the hermitage of Saint-Andre.


Near there stood, in 1808, a castle of
simple, but elegant, which has disappeared in the last wars.
The locals called it the casa Monteleone, from the non-Italianate
of a French emigrant, who had recently died there, leaving a
immense fortune he had acquired in commerce. His both
girls still inhabited it. Mr. Alberti, simple trader, his
son-in-law and his partner, had been taken by the plague in Salonika.
A few months later, M. de Montlyon lost his wife, mother of his
second daughter. Mrs. Alberti was from another marriage. Naturally
brought to sadness, he had abandoned himself to it without reserve since
this last misfortune. A dark melancholy was slowly consuming him
between her two children, whose even caresses could not
distract. What remained of his happiness was only him
recall bitterly what he had lost. The smile did not appear
to be reborn on his lips only at the approach of death. When he
felt that his heart was going to freeze, his forehead laden with trouble
cleared up for a moment; he seizes the hands of his daughters,
brought to her lips, pronounced the name of Lucile and Antonia, and
he expired.


Mme Alberti was thirty-two years old. She was a sensitive woman,
but of a soft and a little serious sensitivity, which was not
susceptible to splinters and transport. She had a lot
suffered, and none of the painful impressions of his life were
entirely effaced from his soul; but she kept her
memories, without nourishing them on purpose. It was not done
an occupation of her pain, and she did not push back
feelings which link by some links those whose links
the most expensive have been broken. She did not take courage
resignation; she had the instinct. An imagination
moreover very mobile, and easy to get lost in a crowd
of various objects, made it more suitable for receiving
distractions, and even looking for them. Long only daughter and
sole object of the care of her family, she had had an education
brilliant; but the habit of giving in to events without
resistance, most often making the use of its
judgment, his way of appreciating things was less
reasoning than imagination. No one was less elated,
and yet no one was more romantic, but it was
failure to know the world. Finally, the past had been so harsh
for her, that she could no longer aspire to a very happy state;
but her organization also defended her from absolute misfortune.
When she lost her father, she looked at Antonia as her
girl. She had no children, and Antonia had just reached
in its seventeenth year. Madame Alberti promised to take care of her
happiness: it was his first thought, and this thought softens
the bitterness of others. Madame Alberti could never have
understand the loathing of life, as long as she felt the
possibility of being useful and still being loved.


Antonia's mother had succumbed to a breast disease:
Antonia did not appear to have this condition, often
hereditary; but she seemed not to have drawn, from a breast already
inhabited by death, than a fragile and imperfect existence. She
was tall however, and as developed as we are
usually at his age: only there was in his height
slender and slender an abandonment which announced weakness; her head,
with a graceful and charming expression, a little leaning
on his shoulder; her hair, a light blond, tied with
negligence; her dazzling white complexion, barely animated
a slight shade of the softest crimson; his look a little
veiled, which a natural organ defect made shy and anxious,
and who became sadly vague looking for the objects
distant, everything about her gave the idea of ​​a habitual state of
languor and suffering. She was not in pain; she lived
imperfectly and as if with a kind of effort. Accustomed from
childhood with the strongest emotions, this painful learning
had not blunted his sensitivity, and had not made it
less accessible to less deep emotions; she suffered them
all, on the contrary, with the same force. It seemed that his heart
had only one way of feeling, because he still only had one
feeling, and that everything he felt reminded him of the same
pains, loss of mother and father: also the least
circumstance awakened in her that fatal faculty of
associate with the sorrows of others. Anything that could allow
his imagination this connection of ideas drew tears from him or
struck her with a sudden shudder. This tremor was so
frequent, that doctors had regarded it as a disease.
Antonia, who knew he was ceasing to be with his cause, did
did not share their concern; but she had concluded, of good
hour, of this circumstance and of some others, that there was
something special about his organization. Of
consequences in consequences she came to think that she was,
up to a point, disgraced from nature. This
persuasion increased his shyness and especially his penchant for
loneliness, to the point of alarming Madame Alberti, who was
easily, like all those who love.


Their usual promenade was on the shores of the gulf, until
first palaces which announce the entry of Trieste. From there the eyes
extend over the sea, and from distance to distance, a few
more or less close points that escaped sight
Antonia, but that Madame Alberti had returned
so present by dint of describing them to him. There was no
days that she did not entertain him with the great memories that populate
this poetic country, of the Argonauts who had visited it,
Japix which had given its name to its inhabitants, from Diomedes and
of Antenor who had given them laws.


"While circling the horizon, and after having traversed this
distant line of a dark blue, which stands out from the azure more
clear from the sky, can you distinguish, - she said to him, - a tower
whose top reflects the sun's rays? It is that of the
powerful Aguilee, one of the ancient queens of the world. There's some left
barely a few ruins. Not far from there flows a river that my
father showed me in my childhood, the Timave, which was sung by
Virgil. This mountain range, which crowns Trieste, rises
almost sheer above its walls, and grows at our
right, from the hamlet of Opschina, over an incalculable expanse,
serves as a haven for a host of famous peoples in history or
interesting by their manners. There live these brave Tyroleans whose
you have always loved the rustic genius, courage and loyalty; here,
these amiable peasants of Friuli, whose pastoral dances and
happy songs have become European. Coming back to
us, you must notice a little higher than the last masts of the
port, above the roofs of Lazaretto, part of the mountain,
who is infinitely more obscure than the others, who dominates them
many, and whose gigantic and dark aspect inspires the
respect and terror; it is the Cape of Duino. The castle which
occupies the fact, and whose battlements I see from here, passes for
to have been built during a former invasion of barbarians
: the people still call it the palace of Attila. During the
civil wars in Italy, Dante, outlawed from Florence, sought
an asylum. It is claimed that this sinister stay inspired him to plan
his poem, and that it is there that he undertook to paint hell.
Since then, it has been inhabited in turn by party leaders and by
thieves. In this century where everything is fading, I fear it
fell in share with some peaceful lord, who will have
depopulated from demons its formidable towers to nest
doves. "


This was most often the subject of Madame
Alberti with her sister, to whom she sought to inspire little by little
desire to see new objects, in the hope of producing
a favorable diversion from his usual ideas; but the
Antonia's character did not have enough tenacity to follow
long the impulse of a curious desire. She was too weak
and distrusted herself too much to dare to conceive of a will
out of his condition, and, as his depression seemed natural to him,
she didn't think of getting out. It needed something other than
simple motive of curiosity to determine it. The tomb of his
parents was all she knew in the world, and she didn't
not suppose there was anything to look beyond.


"But Brittany, - said Madame Alberti to her, - Brittany is
your homeland.


- That's not where they died, - replied Antonia,
embracing it, - and their memory does not dwell there. "




II


They are formidable men whose desire to see blood holds
awake during the longest winter nights, and who
would slaughter a young bride to have her pearl necklace.

CONDOLA.


Istria, successively occupied and abandoned by armies of
different nations, enjoyed one of those moments of freedom
stormy that a weak people tastes between two conquests. Laws
had not yet regained their strength, and justice suspended
seemed to respect even crimes that a revolution could
make happy. In the great political anxieties, there is a
sort of security attached to the banner of the scoundrels; she can
become that of the State and the world, and the very men who
believe virtuous respect it out of prudence. The multiplicity of
irregular troops, raised in the name of national independence and
almost unbeknownst to the kings, had familiarized the citizens with these
armed bands which descended from the mountains at all times, and which
from there spread to all the edges of the gulf. Almost all
were animated by the most generous feelings, led by the
the purest devotion; but behind them was formed waste
of those violent men, for whom the disorders of politics
are only a pretext, a formidable league to all governments
and disowned by all. A determined enemy of social forces, she
openly aimed at the destruction of all institutions
established. She proclaimed freedom and happiness, but she
marched accompanied by arson, looting and assassination.
Ten smoldering villages already bore witness to the horrific progress of
Brothers of the common good. This is how it was originally called,
before putting oneself above all the conveniences and
violate all laws, the bloodthirsty troop of Jean Sbogar.


The brigands had appeared at Santa Croce, at Opschina, at Materia; we
assured that they even occupied Duino Castle, and that
it was from the foot of this promontory that they threw themselves,
of the night, like hungry wolves, on all the shores of
gulf, where they carried desolation and terror. The peoples
terrified soon rushed to Trieste. The casa
Monteleone in particular was far from a safe haven. A noise
had spread that Jean Sbogar himself had been seen wandering,
in the midst of darkness, under the castle walls. Fame
gave it colossal and terrible forms. It was claimed that
frightened battalions had retreated at his sight alone. Too
Was he not a simple peasant from Istria or Croatia, like the
Most of the adventurers who accompanied him. The vulgar the
was the grandson of the famous brigand Sociviska, and the people of
world said he was descended from Scanderberg, the Pyrrhus of
Modern Illyrians. Simple men, who are still in love
of wonders, adorned its history with the most
singular and the most diverse; but we agreed to admit that he
was fearless and ruthless. In no time his name had
acquired the credit of a tradition of ancient times, and in the
figurative language of this people, among whom all the ideas of greatness
and power come together in that of an advanced age, we
called him old Sbogar, although no one knew what number
years had passed over his head, and none of his companions,
fallen into the hands of justice, could not have given
less information.


Madame Alberti, whom an easy to shake imagination disposed to
welcome extraordinary ideas, and who took care of
Jean Sbogar since the moment the name of this man struck
his ears for the first time, it was not long before he felt the
need to leave casa Monteleone for Trieste; but she
hid her motives from Antonia, whose sensitivity she feared.
She had also heard of the Brothers of the Common Good and
of their captain; she had cried over crimes they were
were guilty when the story reached him; But
this impression left little trace in his mind, because
that she misunderstood the wicked
: it seemed that she avoided thinking of them, so as not to be
forced to hate them. This feeling was beyond the measure of his strength.


There is something melancholy about the position of Trieste which
would squeeze the heart, if the imagination was not distracted by the
magnificence of the most beautiful buildings, by the wealth of
more cheerful cultures. It was the back of a barren rock,
embraced by the sea; but the efforts of man gave birth to it
nature's most precious gifts. Pressed between the sea
immense and inaccessible heights, it offered the image of a
jail; art, conquering the ground, made it a delightful stay.
Its buildings, which extend amphitheatrically from the port
up to a third of the elevation of the mountain, and beyond which
grows, from degree to degree, orchards of a grace
inexpressible, pretty chestnut woods, bushes of
fig trees, pomegranate trees, myrtles, jasmines, which scent
the air, and above all this the austere peak of the Alps
Illyrian, remind travelers crossing the Gulf
the ingenious invention of the Corinthian capital: it is a
basket of bouquets, fresh as spring, which rests under
a rock. In this lovely solitude, but limited, we have
nothing neglected to multiply the pleasant sensations. Nature has
gave in Trieste a small forest of holm oaks, which became
a place of delight: it is called, in the language of the country, the
Farnedo, or the Grove. Never these rural divinities, whose
happy shores of the Adriatic are the favorite land,
lavished, in a space of little extent, more beauties made
to seduce. Le Bosquet often even adds to all its charms
that of loneliness; because the inhabitant of Trieste, occupied
distant speculations, needs a broad point of view and
indefinite like hope. Standing on the end of a cape, and his
telescope fixed on the horizon, his pleasure is to look for a sail
distant, and from the Farnedo one cannot see the sea.
Alberti often drove his Antonia there, because only there
she found the picture of a world foreign to that where her pupil
had lived until then, and able to excite in his young
imagination the desire for new sensations. For a living soul,
the Farnedo is a thousand leagues from the towns; and Mrs. Alberti
sought to develop in Antonia that instinct for immensity which
weakens local impressions, and that makes them less durable and
less dangerous. She already had enough life experience
to know that to be happy is only to have fun.


The feast of the Oak Grove had the most charm
spicy for Madame Alberti. Raised like a man we want
make an educated man, she knew the poets, and had
often dreamed of those dances of Arcadia and Sicily, which have so
of amenities in their verses. She remembered them, in costume
near, seeing the Istrian shepherd in his floating habit and
light, loaded with bows and ribbons, under his large hat
crowned with bouquets of flowers, lift casually and put back
on the grass the young girl who escapes him, her head veiled, without
have been recognized, and who gets lost, in another group, at the
among her companions, similar to each other. Often a voice
suddenly rises among the dancers, that of an adventurer of
Apennines, who sings some stanzas from Ariosto or Tasso:
it is the death of Isabelle or that of Sophronie; and at this
nation which enjoys all its emotions, and which is proud of
all his mistakes, the illusions of a poet are authorities
that ask for tears. One day, as Antonia walked in next door
of her sister in the middle of one of these gatherings, she was stopped by
the sound of an instrument she did not know: she
approached and saw an old man who walked regularly on a
kind of guitar, topped with a single string of horsehair, a bow
coarse, and which sounded hoarse and monotonous, but very
goes well with his deep, rhythmic voice. He sang, in verse
slaves, the misfortune of the poor Dalmatians, whom misery exiled
of their country; he improvised complaints about the abandonment of the
native land, on the beauties of the gentle countryside of the happy
Macarsca, from ancient Trao, from Curzole with black shades; of
Cherso and d'Ossero, where Medea dispersed the torn limbs
of Absyrthe; of beautiful Epidaurus, all covered with laurels
roses; and Salone, whom Diocletian preferred to the empire of the world.
At his voice, the spectators first moved, then moved and
transported, crowded together sobbing; because in the organization
tender and mobile of the Istrian, all sympathies become
personal emotions, and all feelings of passions.
Some shouted shrilly, others pulled back against
them their wives and children; there were some who kissed
sand and crushing it between their teeth, as if we had
wanted to tear them also from their homeland. Antonia surprise
walked slowly towards the old man, and looking at him more
close, she noticed that he was blind like Homer. She
reached for his hand to deposit a pierced silver coin, because
that she knew that this gift was precious to poor Morlaques,
which adorn the hair of their daughters. The old poet
grabbed by the arm and smiled, because he saw that it was
a young woman. So, instantly changing fashion and
subject, he began to celebrate the sweets of Love and the graces
of the youth. It was no longer accompanied by the guzla, but it
accentuated his lines with much more vehemence, and
all he had strength, like a man whose reason is
disturbed by drunkenness or by a violent passion; he hit the
ground with his feet, bringing Antonia back to him, almost
terrified:


"Flowered, flowered, - he cried, - in the fragrant groves
of Pirano, and among the grapes of Trieste that smell of roses! The
jasmine itself, which is the ornament of our bushes, perishes and
delivers its little flower to the air, before it has opened, in
the poisoned plains of Narente. This is how you would dry up
if you grew, young plant, in the forests which are subject to
the domination of Jean Sbogar. "




III


The hills hear the sound of that terrible voice, their blacks
rocks and their groves quiver. Warned by the dreams of
danger, the people run through the heather and light the
alarm signals.

OSSIAN.


Antonia slowly returned to the city, leaning on her sister,
but silent and thoughtful. The name of the brigand was not born for
the first time in his heart a feeling of fear for
herself and a vague worry about her future. She had thought
to the fate of the unfortunate who fell into his hands, without assuming
never could this destiny become his, and the language
as inspired by the old Morlaque improviser had struck her with
terror, by making him understand the possibility of this
terrible misfortune, among the various accidents of which life is
threatened. This idea was however so devoid of reason, this danger
so far from all likelihood that Antonia, who had no
secrets for Madame Alberti, did not dare to confide in her the subject of
trouble. She moved closer to her, pressed herself against her with
a thrill as the progress of the night, the silence of loneliness,
the still more frightening murmur that came from time to time
deep in the woods, only increased. Unnecessarily madam
Alberti tried to take his mind off the feeling that
seemed to fill it; as she ignored what could
excite him, chance made him choose the reason for the conversation
cleaner to maintain it.


“What a disastrous fame that of Jean Sbogar! - she says; -
how painful it is to fix men's attention to this
price!


- And who knows, - replied Antonia, - if it is not the
foolish desire to fix their attention, which has produced so much
distractions and so many crimes? Besides, - she added, in the
secret intention perhaps to reassure herself, - there is
undoubtedly a lot of exaggeration in what one tells about it. I
am inclined to believe that we are slandering a little these people that we
call villains, and the idea that I have of the goodness of God
does not reconcile well with the possibility of depravity if
horrible.


- The benevolence of your heart deceives you, - replied Madame Alberti.
- It is true that absolute evil is repugnant to the just idea that we
we make out of the extreme goodness of the Creator and the perfection of
his works; but he certainly believed it necessary for their
harmony, since it has placed it in everything that has come out of its
hands beside the good and the beautiful. Why wouldn't he have thrown in
the society of devouring and terrible souls, who only conceive
thoughts of death, as he unleashed in the deserts these
tigers and those dreadful panthers, who drink the blood of
animals without ever quenching their thirst? Although it was the principle of
all good, he wanted to allow evil in the moral order; But
has he not given ugly forms to certain species in
the physical order, although it is the principle of all beauty, and
that he has clothed his works with so many attractions when he has
desired? Didn't you notice that he liked to tie the seal
repelling evil beings with the most off-putting ugliness
and dangerous? Do you remember that kind of white vulture
like snow, that one of my father's correspondents had brought
from Malta? Its shape is not unpleasant; there is nothing more
pure and more elegant than its plumage; when we see it by the
back on one of the scattered stones of the cemeteries where he made his
remains, do you want to approach it and examine it in detail?
if he turns around, hopping on his slender legs, and he
stop on you his eye full of bloody fire surrounded by a
broad cadaverous film, like a specter mask, you
shudder with horror and disgust. Under the most appearances
flattering, I convince myself that it is the same for all
wicked, and that we find in them, at first glance, the sign
distinct from the reprobation that God attached to them by creating them for
The crime.


- According to that, - said Antonia, affecting to smile, - your
imagination does not lend very seductive charms to the chief of
Brothers of the common good; you must have a strange idea of ​​the
beauty of Jean Sbogar. "


Madame Alberti, who presented herself with extreme ease
objects with which his mind was struck, and which had been composed
immediately the ideal of the most ferocious of bandits, would respond to
his sister, when the sound of a hurried footstep was heard
behind them, at the bend of the path.


Night had fallen completely, and all the walkers were
returned to the bastides, whose amphitheater is strewn with space
in space. The two sisters stopped shaking, painfully
warned by the dark images that had just passed in front of
their eyes. They were listening, still and breathing
suspended. A soft, melodious voice, one of those voices that have the
privilege of enchanting cares, of transporting the soul in a
calmer region, in a more perfect life, succeeded to their
disturbs a pleasant emotion.


He was a young man; one could judge by the delicacy and
the freshness of his organ. He was wrapped in a man- hold
short in the Venetian style, wearing a hat turned up with plumes
floating, and it passed over the path, or rather it flew
from rock to rock, like a night ghost, repeating the
refrain of the old blind man:


"If ever you grew, young plant, in forests subject to
the domination of Jean Sbogar, of the cruel Jean Sbogar. "


Reached a higher rock, its whiteness detached from the outline
dark of the mountain, he remained standing and abruptly interrupted
his refrain; then, after a moment of silence, he left
the place where it had stopped such a savage, so painful cry,
so formidable and so plaintive at the same time, that it did not seem
proceed with a human voice; and at the same time, this moan
fierce, like that of a hyena who has lost her young,
repeated on twenty different points of the forest: then the unknown
disappeared, resuming his romance.


Antonia was not fully reassured until entering the city, and
she had often promised herself, on returning, not to leave if
late the Farnedo. Looking back on it, however, she
condemned her terrors, and found, in all that had moved her,
natural explanations; but his weakness and shyness do not
soon won out over the efforts of his reason. Her
sensitivity, in the absence of external exercise, became more and more
more to scary chimeras
: it was lost in a boundless wave, and it was composed in
she has a worried feeling about the world, that her isolation, her
distrust, its estrangement from all the many societies
made him more irritable day by day; sometimes this mess
ideas, produced by fear, went to a sort of bewilderment
which caused him shame and dread. Madame Alberti had it
noticed with extreme pain; but, faithful to his system of
distraction, she always promised herself to provide enough
diversion to his mind, until happy affection and
legitimate came to give it to his heart. It was the last, it was
also the most pleasant and the most specious of his hopes. he
do not despair of anything for those who did not like:
their existence has a complement to receive, and a complement which
is often the destiny of all the rest of life.




IV


Then appear strange, unforeseen and bearing figures; and
would not know how to say that these fust men or demons, n and such
phrenesia fust effect of sleeping awake or awake sleep.

OF LANCRY.


The walks of the Farnedo had not stopped; only
Madame Alberti took care to start them early, and
return to Trieste before the end of the day. The season was
fiery, and the shade of the oaks barely maintained enough
freshness to temper the heat of the sun, when the wind
Africa was blowing on the gulf. Huge yellow clouds
dull, and yet dazzling, gather in a part of the
sky, roll and fall from their gigantic peaks, like
avalanches of fire, spread, flatten and settle. A
dull noise accompanies them and ceases when they stop: then the
all of nature remains chained with terror, like a threatened animal
of his destruction, which takes on the aspect of death for him
escape. There is not a leaf that quivers, not an insect
which rustles under the still grass. If we turn our eyes to
the place where the sun must be, we see floating in a column
oblique of luminous atoms the impalpable dust that the sirocco has
taken from the desert, and whose origin can be recognized by its shade of
brick red. No movement, moreover, can be seen,
except that of the kite which describes, at the top of the firmament, its
circular flight, marking from afar, in the sand, its prey
overwhelmed under the weight of this formidable atmosphere. No voice
that is heard, if not the shrill and plaintive cry of
carnivorous animals, which, filled with a ferocious instinct, and
believing in the last day of the world, come to claim the debris of
created beings that were promised to them. The man himself, despite his
moral power, yield to that power against which he has
never tried his faculties. His noble forehead leans towards the
earth, its limbs weaken and give way under it; without
courage and without spring, he falls and waits, in a languor
invincible, let a softer air revive it, restore movement to
his spirits, warmth to his blood, and life to nature.


Mrs. Alberti often rested with Antonia, under a group
trees, in a pretty place where you can discover part of
Trieste, to the Church of the Greeks, and where the earth is coated
short, cool grass that invites you to sleep. Antonia, whose
delicate organs did not resist the impression of sirocco,
had fallen asleep, and his sister was walking a few paces away, inside him
making a garland of small blue speedwells, in the manner
girls from Istria, who braid them with great art. As
she lacked some to complete it, she had
walked in various directions out of the enclosure where Antonia lay, and
when she realized that she had come out of it, the efforts
that she had done to find her had taken her away
more. At first she had laughed at her mistake, like a
accident without consequence, then she was a little worried; and
his anxiety, which made his walk more hasty, the
also made it more uncertain. Finally, worry had made
place to a more painful feeling, but which was to give way to
reflection. There was a sure way to find Antonia: it was
to call him with force; but a cry would have disturbed his rest, and
not without danger for this lively and sensitive organization, that
the slightest unexpected emotion always offended. What else
natural to think, on the contrary, that Antonia, awake,
would call her sister, before she got scared of her absence! AT
this idea, Mrs. Alberti, reassured, sat down and continued her
garland.


During this time, Antonia had indeed woken up. A noise
light that was heard in front of her, in the foliage,
had interrupted his sleep, and his eyelid had half
raised under the one of his arms which wrapped his head. Through
the curls of her hair, which covered part of her
face she had glimpsed, but in a way that the weakness of
her sight made more vague and more alarming, two men who
watched attentively. One of them, as though veiled from a wide
plume that fell on his face, rested on the other, which
was kneeling at his feet, legs crossed under him, in
the attitude of the Ragusans at rest. Antonia, seized with fear,
closed her eyes and held her breath, so as not to let
recognize the agitation she was experiencing by the movement of her
breast.


"There she is, - said one of these strangers, - here is the girl from the house
Monteleone, who fixed the fate of my life.


- Master, - replied the other, - you said the same about the
daughter of the bey of the mountains, to whom we killed so many people, and
of the favorite slave of this Turkish dog, who made us pay
so dear the fortress of Czetim. By Saint Nicholas, if we had
wanted to do the same to reduce Wallachia, you would be
now hospodar, and we wouldn't need ...


- Shut up, Ziska, - replied the one who had spoken first, -
your ridiculous exclamations will wake her from her sleep, and I will be
deprived of the happiness of seeing her, which I may not enjoy anymore.
Be careful not to stir the air circulating around her, because I
punish even on your old father, who weeps so bitterly
to have given birth to you. You laugh, Ziska ...
Antonia is beautiful ...


- Not bad, - said Ziska, - but not enough to effeminate a heart
man, and to stop a troop of brave men in a forest of
pleasure craft, where there is no water to drink. Master, -
he continued, getting up, - where do you want me to wear this
child? "


Antonia trembled, and, despite herself, her arm fell on her breast.


" Wretched! - resumed Ziska's master in a hollow voice, - who
asked you for your execrable services? Do you know that this girl is
my wife before God, and that I swore that never a hand
mortal would not detach a single jewel from her virgin crown,
not even mine, Ziska? No, I will never have a common bed
with her on earth ... What am I saying? ah! if I knew that my
lips one day profaned those innocent lips, which were never
half open that in the chaste kisses of a father, I would burn them
with a fiery iron. Our youth were cradled in ideas
violent and fierce; but this young girl is sacred to my
love, and I take care of the conservation of the least of his hair ...
My soul clings to her, hovers over her, you see, and follows her to
through this short life, in the midst of all the pitfalls of
men and destiny, without her noticing me for a moment.
It is my conquest of eternity; and since I lost my
existence, since I am forbidden to share it with a
sweet and noble creature like this, I take it for everything
the future. I swear by the sleep she tastes now that
her last sleep will reunite us, and she will sleep near me
until the earth is renewed. »Antonia's trouble
did not stop increasing, but he began to interfere with
curiosity and interest. She wanted to look, her sight too weak
served her badly; she gently raised her head, the strangers
walked away. She stood up completely, and fixed her eyes on
the place where she had heard them; there was only one left
who slipped bent under the bushes: he was hideous.


The strangers had hardly disappeared when Madame Alberti, warned
by some noise, arrived at the foot of the oak under which Antonia
had fallen asleep. She listened to his story without believing it. Antonia him
had given too much evidence of the weakness of his reason, to
whether she suspected anything other than a vision or illusion of
think about what she was telling; but like this idea even him
inspired a remarkable tenderness, his sister was mistaken about the
nature of his emotion; she attributed to the compassion aroused by a
great peril is the pity which arises from a great delusion of mind.
She surrendered with abandon to the ideas she had conceived, and
this habitual preoccupation took, as much as it could
take on, the character of a mania. “What! poor unfortunate woman, -
cried Madame Alberti at last. - who do you convince yourself you are
loved? From one of Jean Sbogar's lieutenants, God forgive me!


- From Jean Sbogar, - resumed Antonia, stepping back, as if she
had stepped on a viper ... - That is probable! "


It was impossible, according to this, to return to the Farnedo.
Antonia hardly left the house; only when its
a calmer mind hadn't been troubled by a few of these
terrors whose object passed for imaginary, she went, alone,
breathe the cool evening breeze on the harbor. Sometimes she
stopped under the walls of the Saint-Charles Palace, and she
sought to discover, from there, this castle of Duino, of which his father
and his sister had spoken to him so often. Arrived at the pier which is
approaching, she advanced mechanically along the road,
to the place where it ends in a small high work,
covered, on the sea side, with a narrow bench, which cannot receive
conveniently only one person. This loneliness, placed between
an inhabited city and the deserted sea, pleased his imagination and
did not frighten him. She loved to see, after a day
nebula, the sensitive flow of the gulf, when its slate face
suddenly breaks from space to space, the frothy benches
rush one over the other to the shore, let the wave rise,
whitens and falls back under the wave that follows it, which envelops it and
drags him into a wave further away; while the gulls
rise as far as the eye can see, come down rolling on themselves,
like the spindle of a shepherdess slipping from her hand, brush against the water,
lift it off the wing, or appear to run over its surface. One night
that she had stayed there longer than usual, retained by
the charm of the night, which had never been of a more serenity
pure and lit by a resplendent moon, she took
pleasure to see the light of this peaceful star extending from the top
mountains in silvery sheets, washed with a light tint
bluish, and marry the earth, the sea and the sky, flooded with its
still clarity. The silence of the coast, interrupted only
hour by hour by the signals of the marine guards, left
hear the quivering of the water that was coming to die in front of
Antonia, and the beating of a small boat attached to
the end of the mole, which the waves pushed back at equal intervals
against the foot of the road. His thought, plunged into a wave
infinite, like the element that presented itself to his eyes, had lost
seen the world, when a sudden feeling of dread returned
all its alarms. This feeling, lightning fast,
determined by an inexplicable connection of ideas, it was the
remember what had happened to him on his last walk in the
Farnedo, of the incomprehensible appearance of this man who had
arrogated absolute power over his life. Such is the empire of
imagination, that she immediately pictured this scene, and
that at the end of a climb, all his senses, equally deceived,
gave way to the most complete illusion. She still thought she saw and
hear. A bright light, part of Duino, and followed by
dull explosion, destroyed prestige, but the impression
remained. Antonia's heart was beating violently; a sweat
cold ran down his forehead; his worried gaze sought to
right and left an object she was afraid to see; his ear
listened in silence, and was impatient with its continuity
sorry. She would have liked to be distracted from this terror without
object by a reasonable cause of fear. By dint of attention,
she thought she noticed that they were talking in an undertone to her: she
got up and sat down; his legs were shaking. The voices took on a
little more strength; but they came closer. She believed
recognize the accent of this Ragusain who had proposed to remove it
de la forêt: Where do you want me to carry this child? and the same
instant it seemed to him that we were pronouncing more or less the same
lyrics. She could hardly convince herself that her senses did not
were not deceived by a dream: she leaned down to hear
better; these words were not finished, or they were repeated.
They distinctly hit his ear.


" Rather die! Answered a higher voice, which was
moreover closer to her. She judged that she was not
separated from the man who spoke only by the narrow angle that the
wall projected onto the roadway: a little more, she would have felt
the air stirred by his breath. She quickly turned to the other
end of the bench; and, during this movement, she saw two men
who rushed into the little boat, and who were
rowing force. The moon was hidden behind clouds of a
pearl-gray, which gradually tore into thick flakes. A die
its rays fell on the basket, and lit a white feather
abandoned to the winds, which shaded the hat of one of the
travelers. Antonia could hardly make out anything. Eager to
regain the city, she walked in two or three minutes the
length of the roadway, and passed like a shadow beside the
sentry who was resting on his escopette.


 "God save you, signora," he said to her. - It's getting late for
 young ladies.


- I thought I was alone on the pier, - she replied.


"So you were there alone," replied the soldier; - and since a
hour, a living soul has not approached it, unless it is
the demon or Jean Sbogar.


- Heaven preserve us from Jean Sbogar! - cried Antonia.


- God is listening to you! Said the soldier, crossing himself.


At the same moment the cannon sounded for the second time on the side of
Duino.


This new account of Antonia was not greeted with more
trust that the first. It was too visible that the attention
compassionate and painful that we pretended to grant him
had nothing in common with the interest of conviction. Struck by
this idea, she insisted with a noble calm that astonished Madame
Alberti, but who did not persuade her. Antonia, left alone,
covered her eyes with her hands, and reflected on her situation with
a deep bitterness. The opinion she had formed from
childhood, the singularity of its organization and the state of
disgrace in which nature had given birth to him, confirmed by
the feeling that she aroused around her, fixed in front of her
mind, and developed to the highest degree this extreme disposition
to mistrust and fear, which formed the basis of its
character. His weakness was a kind of moral illness, which
is not difficult to cure with proper care
of which Madame Alberti was capable; but this one saw something else
thing, and his prevention had increased in this respect by all
efforts she had made to overcome it. Antonia was his
one thought, hope, love and purpose of his life. To lose
this girl loved by death, or see her delighted with projects
which she had founded on her by an incurable delusion of mind,
it was pretty much the same; and when it had taken place
dreading this last misfortune, she had done everything to
persuade that it was impossible. In the fatal error of his
tenderness, she repelled the suspicion that obsessed her well, because
that he would have killed her; but there was too much danger in it
to consider it face to face, to discuss it coldly, to realize it
finally, so that she would dare to undertake it. She had managed to
to distract himself from it, and not to chase it away. His imagination vivid and
absolute, moreover, in all the ideas she had of the
things, and which attached, by an involuntary preference and
invincible, to those who were most painful to believe, do not
hardly ever changed the way she had seen them
Once. The two sisters therefore looked at each other with a
mutual affection, arising in one from an excess of
shyness, in the other from an excess of solicitude which made them
also unhappy.




V


0 my God! you will not be confused in the rigors of your
justice the innocent with the guilty! Hit, hit that head
long condemned! she devotes herself to your judgments; But
spare this woman and this child who are alone in the midst of
difficult and perilous ways of the world! Is he not among these
pure intelligence, first work of your hands, some angel
benevolent, favorable to innocence and weakness, who
deign to stick to their footsteps, in the form of the pilgrim, for
to preserve the storms of the sea, and to divert the iron from their hearts
sharp bandits?

TRAVELER'S PRAYER.


At that time, some very important business, which their father had
left to settle in Venice, requested the presence of Madame
Alberti. She regarded this circumstance as the happiest
who could arrive in the state of Antonia, and again persuaded himself
that the unfortunate impressions which had altered his judgment, and
which seemed to depend on the influence of places and
memories, would finally give way to a total change of habit and
kind of life. The great fortune they enjoyed
allowed to obtain, in this opulent city and
magnificent, all the pleasures that luxury and the arts bring together
from all parts of the world; and this new kind of emotion,
which appeals more to the imagination than to the sensitivity, offered
infinitely less danger to an irritable soul than those who
result from the contemplation of the natural beauties of the universe,
whose imposing grandeur overwhelms thought. Venice trip
was therefore resolved, and Antonia had never received any news
with more joy. Trieste had become for her a palace
magic, where, constantly observed by invisible spies, she
lived at the mercy of an unknown tyrant, absolute master of his freedom
and of his life, which several times had balked at removing it from
among her own, to transport her to a new world,
she did not form an idea without shuddering, and who was perhaps
on the eve of accomplishing this fatal resolution, if Providence
did not hide it from his eyes. The hope of being delivered from this
subject of terror acted promptly on her, and returned her
of days this freshness and this grace of youth that
anxiety had long withered. The smile reappeared on his
lips, serenity on his forehead; more expansive confidence,
a sweeter abandon reigned in her speeches, and Madame Alberti,
delighted that the mere approach of departure produced such effects
able to justify his conjectures, neglected nothing
hasten even more. The lack of security of public roads
however demanded that it be put back to a fixed day when
brought together all the travelers heading towards the same
period, to use each other as an escort. The car of
Madame Alberti was the ninth to the meeting, on the
sandy platform of Opschina, from where the eye embraces in the distance the
gulf and uneven dunes with which its long circuit is bristling.
Antonia and her sister were accompanied by a chaplain, a man
businessmen, a trusted old servant, and two women.
There was a vacant place in the interior. The day was
already advanced, because the bora, which had blown in the morning, had
fears one of those hurricanes that we never brave with impunity
on the high coasts of Istria, from where they remove the loads
the heaviest, that they roll to the bottom of the abyss. This
caravan was moreover large enough that there was no
of reasonable fear to conceive robbers, even when one is
would find himself surprised by the darkest night; and we should
sleep only in Montefalcone, which is a few leagues away, on
the poetic edges of the Timave. The evening was suddenly
embellished, the air was fresh and pure, the sky cloudless. The
crews followed each other slowly on steep slopes and
planers from the back of the mountains of Trieste, through vast
thickets strewn with rocks which raise their sharp peaks here and there
and gathering in a short, arid foam. The only greenery
that we notice is that of the lustrous leaf of the holly, and
a few brambles dragging their thorny arms on the sand. At
foot of the coast one sees a group of houses of the
sadder, whose roofs, laden with enormous stones, attest
the ravages of the bora, by the often unnecessary obstacles that
multiplies against her, in all the places where she is accustomed to
unleash. It was the hamlet of Sestiana, populated by sailors and
of fishermen.


While the horses were relaxing from the long effort they
had opposed the weight that was falling on them, in a path
slippery and swift, Sestiana's old host leaned against the
door of Madame Alberti's car, and prayed to her, in the name of
Christian charity, to receive as far as Montefalcone a poor
traveler overwhelmed with fatigue, who could not continue his journey.
He was a young monk from the Armenian Convent of the Lagoons of Venice,
who was returning from the mission, and whose gentle and honest face
had inspired the keenest interest. This prayer was one of those
that Madame Alberti and her sister would never have rejected,
whatever reason they had for doing so. The door
opened, and the Armenian, supported by the good old man who had
presented, set foot on the steps of the coach, after having
stammered a few words of thanks, and lifted himself painfully
towards the place which was intended for him. His soft white hand
like that of a young girl accidentally leaned on
Madame Alberti, but he hastily withdrew her; and,
recognizing that the car was almost entirely occupied by
women, he folded down over his face the enormous wings of his
round felt, before being seen. Soon after we recovered
working. Night had completely fallen by then.


The gap from Sestiana to Duino is filled by a light strike
of fine and mobile sand, which leaks from all sides under the wheels,
and in which the car, rising and sinking in turn,
seems agitated by a rippling movement similar to that of
waves. A circumstance that increases this prestige in the light
false and misleading of the evening stars, it is the brilliant color
of the silver arena, and the vague expanse of the horizon, which, less
circumscribed that during the day, is prolonged of any
the uncertainty of its darkness, and presents to the eyes some
from the vast sea. It seems then that the horses have descended
in a ford and traverse a space flooded by the waters of
mountains. Antonia, who was in one of the corners of the car,
had lifted the ice on his side, and enjoyed, breathing the air
cold but energetic of the night, of this kind of illusion. The
difficulty in walking horses on fleeting and deep ground
who slipped under their feet at all times had them extremely
slowed down, and the slightest external agitation was noticed.
Several times Antonia, who was only too willing to grab
all matters of concern, had believed to see shadows of a
singular form to slip into the indecisive space that stretched
in front of her; and, troubled, she had held her breath, to
to know if this movement was not accompanied by some noise, this
which must undoubtedly be if it resulted from something other than
from a simple mistake in his sight. Suddenly the postilion, who
perhaps was experiencing something similar, or feared
to give in to sleep, began to sing a Dalmatian pisme, a sort of
romance that is not without charm when the ear is there
accustomed, but which surprises him by his extraordinary character and
wild when it is heard for the first time, and whose
modulations are so bizarre in taste that the only inhabitants of
countries have the secret. The song is extremely simple
however, because it only consists of one pattern repeated endlessly,
according to the usage of primitive peoples, and of two or three sounds
more that come back in the same order; what is there
incomprehensible, it is the very species of these sounds, which
do not appear to proceed from the voice of a man, and of which an artifice
analogous to that of those jugglers in France, who are called
ventriloquists, but which is natural to the Illyrian singer, changes to
any moment the expression, the volume, the place of sensitive origin.
It is a successive and rapid imitation of the most
severe, shrill cries, and especially those that the inhabitant
deserted places collects in the middle of the nights in the rumor of
winds, in the whistling of storms, in the howling of
terrified animals, in this concert of complaints which
lonely forests at the onset of a hurricane, when everything takes
in nature a voice to moan, up to the branch that the wind
broke, without detaching it entirely from the tree to which it
belongs, and which swings shouting suspended from a rest
bark. Sometimes the full and sonorous voice resounds without obstacle
around listeners; sometimes you would think it resonates under a
vault, and sometimes the air takes it beyond the clouds and
leads it astray in both, where it imbues it with a charm that
never tasted in human melodies. However this music
air does not have the purity so calm and so suitable to rest the soul
that we attribute to those of the angels, even when she is
approach: it is, on the contrary, severe at the heart of
man, because the thought that it awakens is full of
tumultuous memories, passionate feelings, worries and
of regrets; but it attaches, it leads, it subjugates
attention, which cannot free itself from its empire. She's calling back
those formidable and gentle accords of the marine divinities, which bound
travelers and who lured their ship into the reefs
inevitable. The stranger endowed with a lively imagination, who, seated
on the shores of Dalmatia, only once heard the young
morlaque girl to exhale her evening song, and deliver her
accents that no art can teach, that no instrument
will never imitate, that no word can describe, could
understand the wonder of the sirens of the Odyssey, and he apologized,
with a smile, Ulysses' mistake.


Antonia, by a tendency common to all weak souls who
willingly soar beyond the bounds of nature, because they
need to be protected and especially to be loved (it is
maybe for them the same), Antonia enjoyed better than
none of those mysterious effects that double the aspect of life,
and which give a new world to intelligence. She didn't believe
not to the existence of these intermediary beings who play a
great role in the superstitions of his native land and his country
adoptive; of these dark giants who reign on the high
mountains, where we sometimes see them sitting in a cloud, their arms
armed with a huge pine tree; of those sylphs lighter than air, which
have their palate in the chalice of a small flower, and that the
zephir carries off in passing; of these nocturnal spirits who keep
the treasures hidden under a rock turned over on its point, or which
wander around to ward off thieves, leaving on their
an inconstant flame that rises, falls, goes out
reborn, disappears and is reborn again: but she loved these
illusions, and Morlaque song, which she had often listened to with
pleasure, renewed them all at once. So she listened with
a lively and unadulterated interest, when a singular movement of the
car, which suddenly stopped, rocking on itself,
interrupted his reverie. The horses had taken a step back,
and the Morlaque song expired in the postilion's mouth.


“The cars ahead of us have taken the lead, - he said, -
while the monk climbed into it; and the road is, if I
don't deceive me, cut off by brigands.


- What's he saying? - exclaimed Madame Alberti, rushing to
door.


- That we have stopped, - resumed Antonia, who had just
fall back into the corner of the car, and shivering
terror.


- Arrested! - repeated Madame Alberti and the travelers.


- Arrested! murdered! lost! - continued the postilion: - these are
they are Jean Sbogar's troop; and here is this execrable
Duino Castle, which will be everyone's tomb.


- By Saint Nicholas of Ragusa! - said the Armenian monk, from a
deep and terrible accent, - the earth would rather crumble under
our feet. "


And as he finished these words, he had rushed into the midst of
robbers. The fierce cry which had frightened Antonia at the Farnedo
was heard at the same time, and a thousand horrible voices roared in
repeating it. The door had fallen behind the missionary;
the blinds were lowered, the horses remained motionless, a
dead silence reigned in the car, it was no longer
outside that a muffled noise that went farther and farther away, when,
at the redoubled whistling of the whip, the horses set off again
gallop, impatient, as if this warning had destroyed on
them faction of a spell. They only stopped when they joined
other travelers.


"And the Armenian, - cried Antonia for a long time,
half-leaning out of the door; - this generous, this brave man
who devoted himself to us ... My God! my God! would we have it
abandoned to the assassins? that would be a horrible action!


- Horrible! - repeated Madame Alberti eagerly.


- Don't worry, my good ladies, - replied the postilion, who
had come down from his seat, and had resumed all his
security. - This monk has nothing to fear from assassins; they don't
can do nothing about him; and, so that you know it, it is he who
ordered me to hunt my horses when I did, and that
returned for that the strength and the voice: also with what impetuosity
they set off; have you noticed? As for him, I saw him
up close, I swear, for the brigands were touching me; and he got
thrown between them and me, so terrible, that some have fallen
fear, and that all the others fled, without
only turn his head. A minute later he was alone, and
he was there, standing, his hand raised, with an air of command:
go away, he shouted at me in such an imposing voice that my blood was
would be frozen in my veins if he had announced anger; But
it was a protective voice, the voice he usually speaks
to the sailors ...


- To the sailors? - said Madame Alberti ... - So you know this
Armenian?


- Yes, I know it? - replied the postilion; - did he not name himself
himself, when he cried: by Saint Nicholas of Ragusa! What is
the saint who tests and rewards travelers? and what
another saint disperses with a word, a gesture, a look, an army
bandits, who have swords in their hands, rage in their hearts, and
who are looking for danger, for gold and for blood? ...
request. "


The postilion was silent, looking at the sky, which appeared to be crossed by
sudden glow. The cannon roared at Duino.




VI


Some call him the "Great Mogul", others the "Prophet.
Elie ”. He is an extraordinary man who can be found everywhere, who
is not known to anyone, and to whom no harm is meant.

LEVI'S.


This explanation was not enough for everyone. Madame Alberti
designed several others, and welcomed them in turn.
Antonia saw nothing distinct in this event, but she
found everything it took to keep dark ideas alive
and dreamers. It was in this frame of mind that she
continued his journey in the midst of the enchanted countryside which
remained to be covered. The next day she saw the laughing Gorizia,
rich in flowers and fruits, and whose appearance charms from afar the
eyes of the traveler, newly emerged from the fruitless sands of
Istrian coast. The ancient memories wake up if
naturally on this beloved hillside of nature, or are conserved there
with such ease, that one believes to live there still under the empire
poetics of mythology. The beauties walk there under
cradles dedicated to the Graces, the hunters gather there in the
Diane's Grove: that's where they come down to go
surprise their prey in the fields bordering the Isonzo,
Isonzo, the most elegant of the rivers in Italy and
Greece, which rolls, deep between two mountains of a
silver sand, its blue waves of sky, as pure as the
firmament that they reflect, and that they do not need
to borrow the sparkle; when it is veiled by clouds,
the inhabitant of Gorizia regains his azure on the limpid surface of
Isonzo. A day later she spotted the delicious canals of
la Brenta, bordered by rich palaces, and the modest village of
Mestre, which serves as a point of communication between part of
Europe and a city to which Europe can show nothing
equal, this superb Venice whose very existence is a
phenomenon. The day was barely dawning, when the boat which was to be there
drive Mrs. Alberti, Antonia and their caregivers
accompanied, entered de la Brenta into the sea. The little
building glided gently on the still wave, along the
poles which direct the nautonier. Mme Alberti saw on her right
a white house, of a very simple construction, in the middle of
islets with which this part of the Lagoons is strewn. He was told that
it was the convent of Armenian Catholics, and Antonia
shuddered, unable to explain his emotion. Finally Venice
began to emerge on the horizon, like a cutout of a
dark color, with its domes, buildings, and a forest of masts
of vessels; then it cleared up, expanded, and opened
in front of the boat, which circulated for a long time through buildings of
any size, before entering the particular channel on
which was located the Monteleone Palace, of which Mrs. Alberti had
recently acquired. A painful circumstance differed
their arrival. This canal was loaded with gondolas which followed a
funeral convoy: it was that of a young girl, because the gondola
which carried the coffin was draped in white, and strewn with
bouquets of roses of the same color. Two torches were burning at
each end, and their light, eclipsed by that of the sun
rising, only seemed a bluish smoke. There was only one
rower. A priest, standing in the front of the gondola, but turned
on the side of the beer, and a silver cross in his hands,
the prayers of the dead whispered in a low voice. In front of him, a
young man dressed in black, kneeling at the head of the coffin,
wept bitterly; the sound of his muffled sobs had
something heartbreaking: it was probably the brother of the
passed away. His pain was so sharp and so deeply felt that,
if she had been elated by another feeling, she would have been
deadly. A lover would not have cried.


This ill-omened encounter easily moved the sensibility
from Antonia; but the first remarkable object made him forget the
superstitious thought she had suggested to him. She was near
of his sister, without reasonable grounds for fear for the future,
surrounded, on the contrary, by all the probabilities of a life
sweet, unalterable tranquility, such happiness, finally,
if it is for tender souls who sympathize with all
sufferings of society, which few of them are called to
taste the same. She stopped at this prospect; she enjoys
for the first time a feeling of pure security; she judged
that she was happy; she conceived the possibility of being
always, and, indeed, never had it been more so.


The people in all countries love the extraordinary,
and subject to being passionate about people and things;
but nowhere does it extend so far as in Venice the faculty of
create gods, passing objects of enthusiasm whose
returns are often disastrous for those who excited him. he
was only a question, at that time, of a young foreigner who
had been reconciled, without knowing how, because he did not
had not even hinted at the pretension, this favor if
brilliant and so fleeting. The genius, courage and kindness of
Lothario was the subject of all the talks; his name was
in all mouths. During the short journey from Mestre to
Venice, he had been brought back twenty times in the conversation of
sailors. After walking through his new home, supporting
Antonia, to whom the habit of delicate health rendered the help
of her necessary arm, even when she was not in pain, Mrs.
Alberti had just taken her to one of the main rooms in
apartment, and they were sitting there one beside
the other. The old steward introduced himself to greet them, and remained
standing while awaiting their orders.


"We are happy, - said Mme Alberti to him; - everything responds to this
that I expected from your care, honest Matteo, and I can judge by
these beginnings that no one will be better served in Venice. -
No, not even Lord Lothario, ”replied the old man.
humiliating his bald forehead and turning his goura in his hands
of black silk.


For this time, Antonia bursting out laughing:


“And what is so, great God! Lord Lothario? Since
we arrived, I only heard him name.


- It is true, - said Madame Alberti, recapitulating her ideas with
its ordinary haste. - Who is Lord Lothario?
Tell us, my dear Matteo, what to think about this man,
whose reputation became proverbial in Venice, before having
past the gulf?


- Ladies, - answered Matteo, - I'm not much myself
more educated, although I have yielded to use by using this
name that has such credit in this country that even the robbers
respect. It may sound overkill, but there is nothing more
true; and Lord Lothario inspires such universal respect
that it has sometimes happened that one has dropped, by naming him,
the stylus in the hands of an assassin; that noise, the only noise of
his approach calmed a revolt, dispelled a gathering of
furious, restored peace to Venice. However he is a young
man not very formidable, I assure you, because we agree in saying
that he has the gentleness and timidity of a child in the world. I do not
I saw it only once, and from quite a distance, but I experienced to contemplate
his physiognomy a shock that made me believe everything
think of him. Since that time, I have tried in vain to
see again. He had left town.


- He's no longer in Venice! - cried Antonia.


- He has been absent for nearly a year against its use, - continued
Matteo, - because he very rarely spends more than two or three months
without going back to it.


- So he doesn't make his ordinary home there? - said madam
Alberti.


- No, certainly, - continued Matteo; - but a long time ago,
for a very long time that he comes from month to month to spend a few
days, sometimes more, sometimes less, almost never beyond one
week or two. This time his long distance would have made
fear that he would have abandoned Venice altogether, if there were not
no other examples; but we remember that it has already disappeared
for several years.


- Several years? - said Antonia; - you don't think so, Matteo;
you told us earlier, if I heard you correctly, that
he was a very young man.


- Very young, in truth, - answered Matteo ... - at least to this
that it seems: I did not say the opposite, but I speak according to
the singular ideas of the people, which do not deserve your
attention, my illustrious ladies, and that I would blush myself ...


- Go on, go on, Matteo. - said Madame Alberti with
vehemence: - this interests us a lot, isn't it true,
Antonia? Sit down, Matteo, and forget nothing, absolutely nothing
regarding Lothario. "


Madame Alberti was indeed keenly interested, and her mind,
quick to grasp all aspects of things, had been ahead of
much the narration of Matteo in romantic conjectures and
wonderful that she was burning to see verified. Antonia had
not a less lively sensitivity; on the contrary, she was more
irritable and greedy for emotions, but she dreaded them, because
that his weakness always exposed him to yield to it. When Matteo had
began to excite Madame Alberti's curiosity by the
vague and bizarre circumstances of her story, she had
pressed against her sister with a shiver of worry and dread
whose impression she tried to cover with a smile.


"What I know of Lord Lothario, - replied Matteo gravely,"
who sat down to obey Madame Alberti, - is not known to me,
as I told you, my illustrious ladies, only by noise
public. He is a young man of the most beautiful figure, who appears
from time to time in Venice with a prince's train, and who
Yet seems to have looked for a home in a big city
than to find the opportunity to spread more liberalities
abundant among the poor, because they do not frequent society much, and
we hardly knew him any habits and friendships
familiar neither in men nor in women. He sometimes visits a
unhappy family to help him; passionate about
arts, which he cultivates with success, he sometimes seeks
conversation and advice from those who exercise them. Out of these
reports, which he limits with extraordinary care, he saw
almost lonely in Venice. He did not enter ten times in
a private house, he does not correspond with anyone; that is
to the point that never before has a man been enough in his privacy
to know the name of his family, or to know the place of his
birth, or to form a conjecture based on the mystery of
his life. It is true that he has a lot of servants, but all of them
are foreigners, because he changes them every time he travels, and
that he procures in Venice even those who are to serve him during
that he resides there. His relationships outside his house do not give
more lights. Since we know him, the post has never
brought a letter, the bankers did not provide him with a
sequin. State revolutions don't change a thing
to its position; in stormy weather he does not wander away
than usual; and when travelers are subject to
precautionary formalities, his papers are always signed
of the governing authority, under the simple name of Lothario, that a
such a circumstance would make it suspect, if one did not know that
this host of good deeds attached to it recommended him
to powerful men of all ages and all parties.


"It would also be difficult to worry him in Venice, where he
is, for a huge class, an object of recognition,
affection, and, so to speak, worship. The proscription of
Lothario, if ever he had given cause to think about it, would be
perhaps the signal for a revolution; but he doesn't seem to
believe, because it forces the unhappy class without caressing it. His
severe spirit and a little haughty, it is assured, separates him
of her by an obstacle which he alone can remove, and which he
would not rise without upsetting the Venetian States, if he had
resolved. This strong distance that he left between himself and the
people do not revolt anyone, because we feel that nature itself
marked the limits, and that it separates it moreover much more
noticeably men who seem to approach her
condition. Indeed, these are the ones for which he shows the
more distance; and if we see lord Lothario coming down
in favor of someone of the heights of his character, it is
never for a lord; it's for a cripple who needs his
support, for a lost child, for an epileptic whose sight
repels passers-by. This does not prevent him from attending
public meetings and large corporations where men can
look and even shine without immediately communicating with
nobody. He was easily noticed there, since Venice has
no artist and virtuoso who is said to be comparable to him;
but far from using these advantages, it is claimed that he is afraid of them.
to argue, that he only lets them see with regret, and that
this is when they could provide him with knowledge
pleasant, or large establishments, that he fled from Venice,
as if to avoid the glare of a public and widespread life, which
would steal from himself and the secret he wants to envelop himself in.
Ambition can do nothing on him; even love never has it
arrested, although there are no more women on earth
attractive than in Venice. Only once did he seem to be busy
a lot of a noble girl, who, on her side, had testified
a strong passion for him; but a very extraordinary misfortune
end to the relations that the public supposed between them. It was at
when Lothario left, who this time had resided in
Venice a little more than usual, and that this feeling, if it has
existed, could not however hold back. Two or three days before his
departure, she disappeared, and her body was only found for a long time
afterwards, against this sandbank where he has settled since
Convent of the Armenians.


"That is incomprehensible, - said Antonia with an air.
deeply focused.


- No, mademoiselle, - replied Matteo, following his thought,
might not have been the same as Antonia's. - Movement
of water discharged by the sea carries on this side most of the
debris floating in our canals. As this lady had the head
long live, and that some peculiarities that I have forgotten announced that
his death had been violent, it was attributed to despair rather than to
an accident: I even believe that a letter from his hand, which was
found afterwards, and in which she explained her design,
justified this supposition.


- Take care, Matteo, - said Madame Alberti. - You started
by telling us that Lothario was young.


"Twenty-five or twenty-six at the most," replied Matteo; -
but he is very fair and delicate to see him, although more skilful
and more robust than the most heavily constituted men, and
it could be possible...


- It would not be possible, - she continued forcefully, - that he
would have been absent for several years since he was
to know in Venice: this is what you have not clarified.
Remember, moreover, that the story of the young girl found dead in
the island of the Armenians must be prior, on your terms, to
when the Armenians came to settle there, and then ...


- I don't know any more, - replied Matteo with a sort of
confusion; - and I only told these ladies what I heard
tell the Venetians, of an advanced age, who claim that they have seen
once Lord Loth ario as he is today, but who
suppose he has not been absent for less than fifty years; and you
feel the extravagance of this idea. Besides, it is too natural
to believe, from Lord Lothario's way of life, that he
a great interest in hiding what it really is, so as not to
understand the care that he undoubtedly took to promote and even to
create the rumors that were to redouble on his account
the uncertainty of opinion. So we must admit that there is no
not so strange and so ridiculous that they have not had at least the
credit of being repeated, for some time, by
people who have a reputation for being sane. You will judge
by most likely of all: it is that this mysterious
stranger has the secret of the philosopher's stone; and, indeed,
we do not see how else to explain the magnificent existence
and the king's expenses of a stranger to whom one does not know the
lesser kind of commerce or industry, the smallest
property, the lightest business relationship of any kind
whether it be. Almost three years ago, it was the time of his
first trip, since the long absence of which these people speak-
here, only jealous people, irritated by its prodigious successes, and all the
more perhaps that he attached less importance to it himself, and
that the most ordinary mark of attention you can get
of him singularly resembles disdain, decided to do
to run over him the most outrageous fable; I hardly dare
repeat, and I wouldn't do it safely anywhere but here. We
went so far as to say that he was the agent of a troop of
counterfeiters hidden in the caves of Tyrol, or in some
Croatia forest. This error did not last long, as the
Lord Lothario spreads the gold so profusely, that it is
easy to verify the title and manufacture. We convinced ourselves well
that there was no better in all the states of
Venice; and, since that moment, if we invented fables about his
However, at least they ceased to be abusive and atrocious. This
that he really is, that's what I don't know, - said Matteo
when getting up from his seat; - but I can repeat that it depends on
almost him to be whatever he wants to be in Venice, if there
come back.


- He will come back to it, "said Madame Alberti, embracing this idea.
with that romantic susceptibility that she took too often
for penetration: it was his only flaw.




VII


You will see me again in this form, and that day will be
the last.

SHAKESPEARE.


This conversation had not left very deep traces
in Antonia's mind. As Lothario's name often came up
in the circles where his sister had introduced her, he never hit
hardly his ears without reminding him vaguely of the bizarre ideas
and singular which Matteo had entertained them; but it was not
than a passing sensation, to which she would have blushed to
deliver. By trying to realize at the first moment of
the impression that this story had given her, she grieved at not
to be able to fix a certain judgment on Lothario: but he was not
in his character to stray for a long time in conjectures
useless on things that touched her so lightly. The
weakness of his constitution, the usual depression of his
organs, forced her to limit her feelings a great deal; and
the more powerful they were around her, the less capable she was
to extend them to unknown objects. One day, however, the noise
ran into Venice that Lothario had arrived, and this noise, soon
confirmed by the mad joy of an enthusiastic populace,
quickly to Antonia. That very day she was to be found, with
Mrs. Alberti, in a company made up largely of
foreign lords, attracted to Venice by the pleasures of
carnival, and who met from time to time to
the music. No sooner had they entered than a lackey announced the
lord Lothario.


A sudden shudder of astonishment and pleasure ran through
assembly, and especially seized upon Madame Alberti, that all
extraordinary ideas easily worried. She took this
movement for a happy presentiment, and like all its
thoughts were related to Antonia, she suddenly squeezed his
hand, without knowing exactly what this demonstration could
mean. Antonia was affected otherwise; her heart sank with a
kind of dread, because she gathered around the name Lothario
some of those disturbing and terrible circumstances that
had struck her in the speech of the old steward. She delayed
even for a while looking up at him; but she saw him
then distinctly, because he was not far from her, and he
seemed to be looking at her when he saw her. At the same time he
had diverted his sight, without fixing it however on any other
object. Leaning on the rim of an antique marble vase loaded with
flowers, he seemed to take part in a little talk
importance, to dispense with paying attention elsewhere.
Antonia was seized at his appearance with an emotion she had
never experienced, and which did not resemble a known feeling.
It was no longer fear; it wasn't the idea either
that she was having the first troubles of love; it was
something vague, indecisive, obscure, which
reminiscence of a dream or a fit of fever. Her breast
throbbed violently, his limbs lost their flexibility, his
eyes were troubled, an indefinable languor chained its
fascinated organs. She tried in vain to break this prestige;
he increased his efforts. She had heard of
the invincible numbness of the lost traveler that the boa ice
a look into the forests of America; dizziness that surprises
a shepherd who came after his goats to the end
one of the gigantic peaks of the Alps, and which, dazzled
stroke by the circular movement that his imagination lends, as
a magic mirror, to the abysses by which it is surrounded, rushes from
itself in their horrific depths, unable to resist
this power which revolts him and which carries him along. She felt
something similar and so difficult to explain, I don't
know what tender and odious, which astonished, which repelled, which
called, which overwhelmed his heart; she trembled. This tremor that
was quite ordinary to him did not frighten Madame Alberti; she
however urged Antonia to come out, and Antonia wanted him. She
made an effort to get up, fainted, sat down and smiled at
Madame Alberti, who regarded that smile as a consent to
stay. Lothario had not changed places.


He was dressed in the French style with elegant simplicity. Nothing
did not announce the slightest research in his costume and in his
adornment, if not two small emeralds that hung from his
ears, and who, under the thick curls of blond hair whose
his face was shaded gave him a singular appearance and
wild. This ornament had long ceased to be in the
fashion in the Venetian States, as in almost all of Europe
civilized. Lothario was not regularly handsome, but his figure
had an extraordinary charm. Her big mouth, her lips
narrow and pale, showing white teeth
dazzling, disdainful and sometimes fierce habit of her
physiognomy, repelled at first glance; but his eye full of
tenderness and power, strength and goodness, imposed the
respect and love, especially when you saw one
a certain soft light, which embellished all her features. His
very high and very pure forehead, also had something strange,
a strongly wavy fold, which age had not produced, and which
marked the trace of a worried and frequent thought. Her
physiognomy was generally serious and gloomy; but no-one
it was no longer easy to erase an unpleasant prevention. he
it was enough for him to lift his eyelid, and leave some
descend that heavenly fire with which his eyes were animated. For the
observers, there was something unspeakable in that look, which
belonged to an organization superior to that of man. For the
vulgar, he was, depending on the occasion, either caressing or imperious:
you could tell he could be terrible.


Antonia had a certain strength on the piano; but his shyness
almost always prevented him from developing his knowledge in front of a
large society. There is a kind of modesty, and that was the
his own, which consists in continually concealing his faculties
do not hurt mediocre people, who are mostly found
everywhere, and perhaps also so as not to displease the minority who
judge, by an appearance of pretension. She never had
consented to perform a piece of music in public only by
condescension for invitations she attributed to a
simple politeness, and to which she was of course
satisfy, without being interested in this weak effort of decorum
reciprocated all the resources of her talent: she even had
noticed that the testimonials of obligatory satisfaction that
received her complacency were not less when she
had made a passage simply and following the only rules of
mechanical execution, that when it was directed by
a sudden and happy inspiration, which satisfied her
internally. So she sat down at the piano calmly enough,
when she was called, and she let her fingers run over
the keyboard with its usual indifference, when its eyes,
distracted by the reflection of a mirror in front of which she was
placed, were struck by a strange and terrible illusion.
Lothario had approached his seat, and as that seat was
mounted on the platform where the instrument was placed, his head pale and
motionless rose alone above Antonia's red cashmere.
The messy hair of this mysterious young man, the fixity
gloomy with its sad and severe eye, the painful contemplation
which he seemed immersed, the convulsive movement of this fold
bizarre and tortuous that misfortune no doubt had engraved on its
forehead, everything combined to give this aspect something
scary. Antonia, surprised, banned, frightened, postponed
successively his gazes from the desk to the mirror and from the mirror to the
desk, soon lost sight of the confused notes and until
the audience that surrounded him. Unintentionally substituting the
feeling that gripped her to the one she had to paint,
she improvised by an extraordinary transition, but which had to
pass for a singular play of his imagination rather than for this
that she really was, an expression of terror so true that
everyone shuddered: she threw herself into Madame Alberti's arms
who brought her back to her place in the midst of a rumor
applause, mixed with surprise and concern. After
to have followed it with my eye to the place where it stopped,
Lothario approached a harp, and a universal movement of
curiosity and pleasure succeeded the one who had just disturbed a
assembly time. Antonia herself, reassured and distracted by
a new impression, expressed the keenest impatience
to hear Lothario, and as he seemed to fear that his condition
would not have become quiet enough for her to take part
for the rest of the evening's pleasures, she felt obliged to him
testify by a look that his indisposition had ceased. This
Lothario's mark of interest had touched her deeply; House
would have said that Lothario, more sensitive still lightly
demonstration he had just received, had changed his existence
while Antonia watched him. His forehead had cleared, his
eyes shone with a strange light; a smile where was done
notice a remnant of tenderness and a beginning of joy
embellished her severe mouth. Passing his left hand through
the wide waves of her hair to look for a pattern or a
memory, and seizing the other with lightness the strings of
harp, so as to give it only a vague vibration, it
entailed by preluding those fleeting but enchanted sounds, which
hold the concert of minds, and he seemed to throw them without
effort and abandon them to the air.


"Woe to you, - he whispered, - woe to you, if you ever
grew in the forests which are subject to the domination of
Jean Sbogar! "


"It is, - he continued, - the famous romance of the anemone, if
known to Zara, and the newest production of poetry
morlaque. "


Antonia, deeply moved by the choice of this tune and by the sound of the
Lothario's voice, approached Madame Alberti, who was very
concerned on her side. She also remembered that voice
harmonious and the place where she heard it; but it could
be the effect of a fortuitous resemblance. Dalmatian song is
too simple, too uniform, too stripped of ornamentation, for
not be easy to mistake between two similar voices. Finally,
after a moment of reflection, Lothario resumed his romance while
whole, by continuing to be accompanied by these air agreements that
the harp returned under his fingers, and whose religious melody
married with his song in the most imposing manner. Reached the
refrain of old Morlaque, he emphasized it with such pity
painful that all hearts were touched, but above all
that of Antonia, who attached a memory to this idea
of worry and dread. Lothario's romance was over
for a long time, that his last words and the dreaded name
of Jean Sbogar still echoed in his thoughts.




VIII


Dream, innocent creatures, and rest in the sweet sleep that
keeps your senses dozing; you will soon have, alas! sad
vigils and cruel insomnia.

MILTON.


Among the assumptions which succeeded in the mind of Mrs.
Alberti following this evening, there was one that offered
enough verisimilitude to strike vulgar imaginations, and
which did not however lack this romantic aspect that
usually searched in his combinations. The rest of his
conjecture was so ill-founded that it was not long before she stuck to
this one, which suited him all the better as it flattered the
most pleasant and dominant of his feelings, his love
for Antonia. The establishment of this beloved sister occupied her without
cease; she was determined not to neglect anything so that he would ensure
his happiness, and to subordinate to this sole interest all the others
conveniences. The immense legacy of Antonia, the one that Mrs. Alberti
had to leave him a day, were made to excite greed
crowd of suitors, and Mrs. Alberti did not want the
her sister's life depended on the vile man whose love would be one
speculation and the alliance a market. It was according to the
feelings that she promised herself to see hatch in her that she
had resolved to dispose of his hand, almost sure that the heart
of Antonia, led by the judgment and experience of a second
mother, could not be wrong. Already several young people of a
great fortune or a distinguished birth had set
needlessly in the ranks. None of them had managed to fix
the attention of her sister, and Mme Alberti, attentive to
slightest sensations of this naive and straightforward soul, do not
had never caught a secret; the first aspect of Lothario
seemed, on the contrary, to have made an impression on her
profound, which alone could explain the singular scene of the
piano. Lothario himself had not seemed less moved, less
troubled, less penetrated by a powerful affection, and the idea that
such a man, so renowned for the brilliance of his mind, for the variety of
his talents, by the tenderness and generosity of his character,
by the grandeur of his manners and the purity of his manners,
could become Antonia's husband, was for Mrs. Alberti the most
sweet illusions. What was this Lothario, however, and how
to bond such serious relationships with a stranger who
persisted, by everyone's admission, to surround himself with the mystery
the most suspect? This problem worried only a moment madam
Alberti. In a short time she had found explanations for everything,
and she had the art or the happiness of relating them all to her
first thought, with enough semblance of truth that Antonia
even, who did not always see things with the same eyes,
remained without objection and without answer. It is true that his heart
began to take an interest in this hypothesis and wish it
was the reality, not that she felt for Lothario this movement
of gentle sympathy which indicates the need to love, this attraction
indefinable that makes you cease to be yourself to live on
the existence of another: what she was experiencing did not yet have this
character; it was rather the training of a submissive soul, the
resignation from the weakness that asks only to be protected, the
voluntary dependence of a timid and sensitive creature on
one that imposes trust and respect on him. Such had him
appeared Lothario, and the first glance of this young man was
arrested over her with so much empire, that it seemed to her that
from that moment he would have taken rights over his destiny.


I have not said so far what Mrs.
Alberti. She thought, quite rightly, that by subtracting from
the story of Lothario what popular rumors had there
added ridiculous and absurd, it remained probable that his
condition and his fortune were all that his
education and its magnificence; that if he had reasons for
hide his name and rank, they could only be
momentary; that this disguise was not alarming for
the love of Antonia which was not below any alliance; that the
desire to grab her attention, get closer to her and
to interest his heart with considerations independent of
those that determine most marriages were probably
on the contrary, the main object of these mysterious appearances
which Lothario had wanted to envelop himself in; that the most
extraordinary, the most inexplicable of the facts that
reported to him, were probably only lies
cleverly insinuated to the people of Antonia by apostate people,
with the intention of increasing the uncertainty where one wanted the
hold back; and this last conjecture was not itself devoid of
evidence, because it was impossible to conceal that Lothario
would have taken a large part in the last events of life
from Antonia. It was, all things considered, the young man who had
passed near her on the return from the Farnedo, singing the chorus of
Morlaque, and this young man was not without design in Trieste.
The apparitions which so often alarmed Antonia, and which had
inspired so much concern in Mme Alberti, when she looked at them
like the illusions of a sick mind, could also proceed
of the same cause. If she had exaggerated or changed a few
circumstances, it is characteristic of weak souls who have everything to
to fear, and tender souls who believe they will never interest
enough. Finally, the Duino event was not explained. How? 'Or' What
brigands, animated by pillage and assassination, would they have
yielded to the mere appearance of a young Armenian monk, if this man
formidable by its value and perhaps by its fame do not
had not imposed an invincible terror, by rushing from the
car where Mme Alberti had granted him a place? No doubt
that he had knocked over several around him before he
disperse, and then undecided in the middle of the night, on a
road he had never traveled, he found himself in
the inability to join his traveling companions. What would be
this monk armed against the statutes of his order, and who devotes himself
with so much courage and forgetting himself for a few
strangers, if not a lover in disguise who wants to save Antonia or who
wants to die for her? If the postilion's pious vision were,
as there was no doubt, the error of a man of the people
completely deprived of lights, what explanation could be
substitute for that of Mme Alberti? There were still questionable things
and incomprehensible; but it would be astonishing if there were not
point in the life of a man who seeks to multiply around
him uncertainties and mysteries, and who has all the skill
necessary to prepare, combine and promote the means that
employs for this purpose. Lothario loved, he adored Antonia, and
all his actions announced, moreover, such a judicious man and
so enlightened, that it was impossible to attribute the oddity
apparent of some of his approaches through
the mind. He had his reasons; and why look for them before
time? What was important for Mrs Alberti was to
to get to know Lothario better, to ensure more frequent
habit of that perfection of character that general opinion
attributed to him, and to see the
feelings she had only suspected until then.
Lothario did not run away from these general meetings where everyone is
dependent on his talent. He avoided particular societies,
where to bring confidence or affections, and it was
very rare, as Matteo had observed, that he consented to
appear more than once. However, he seized with eagerness,
when it was presented to him, the opportunity to see Mrs.
Alberti and his sister; and this singularity, promptly noticed by
everyone, rid Antonia of a lot of pretensions
boring. A visit from Lothario seemed like a gait, and
a step by Lothario excluded even men who could
to compete with it, as to certain advantages, because it
retained advantages over them which are never overlooked by
the vulgar and by the imagination of even the most enamored women
sparkle and noise, a serious soul, an imposing character and
a hidden life.


We have seen that the impression Antonia had at the sight of
Lothario did not resemble those which announce the birth
of the first love in ordinary hearts. A good circumstance
indifferent in itself, and whose effect was not
completely destroyed, this singular illusion of ice where
Lothario appeared to him, had mixed with it a sort of confusion and
indefinable terror. The interest she took in Lothario, the
inclination which drew her towards him, however, had no less
power to have less softness. It bore a print of
fatality which surprised, which sometimes terrified Antonia, but
from which she did not try to defend herself, since Mme Alberti
approved of this feeling, and even found some pleasure in it.
feed. Yet she was astonished that love was so different from
the idea she had made of it, on the tender paintings and
passionate about novelists and poets. She still couldn't see
than an austere and menacing chain that wrapped her in ties
inflexible, and which she would have tried in vain to
shake off the weight. Only when Lothario, distracted for her from
his dark reveries, deigned to indulge for a moment with a natural
full of grace in the simple conversations of familiar friendship; when
this gathering pride, when this painful tension of
spirit, which gave his physiognomy such a majestic dignity
and so sad at the same time, gave way to a sweet abandon; when a
smile came to bloom on this mouth which had since
long lost the habit, and gave his severe features a
frank and pure serenity, Antonia, transported with a joy that she
had never known, understood something of the happiness of loving
a being similar to oneself, and to be loved without sharing: it was
again Lothario who gave birth to her, but it was Lothario
stripped of that je ne sais quoi of strange and dreadful
alarmed his tenderness. It is true that these moments were rare,
and that they passed quickly; but Antonia enjoyed it with
so drunkenness that she had managed to no longer desire another
congratulated; and she was so little mistress then to conceal this
that she felt that Lothario could not be mistaken for long. From
the first time he observed it, we noticed that it
was not without bitterness for him; his forehead darkens, his
breast swelled, he pressed his hand firmly to her eyes and he
went out. From then on, he smiles even more rarely; and, when that
happened to him, he hastened to turn a worried eye on Antonia
and grief.


His love for her was no longer a secret. We felt that all
his thoughts, all his words, all his actions are
reported to her, that she was the sole idea and the sole purpose of
his life. Madame Alberti had no doubts, and Antonia said to herself
sometimes to herself in a movement of pride that she had
trouble to repress; but the love of Lothario, marked with a seal
particular, like the entire existence of this inconceivable man,
had nothing in common with the feeling that bears the same name
in society: it was a serious and thoughtful affection, miserly
of demonstrations and transport, which was barely satisfied, and
who meditated on herself with excessive reserve
as soon as she could fear being heard too well. The
the fire of his glances often betrayed him; but to the expression
ineffable of the chaste and sweet feeling that soon filled
the attack of this temporary fever, Lothario no longer seemed a
lover. He looked like a father with only one daughter left,
only one girl, and who has concentrated in herself all the
affections that he had been allowed one day to share between
other children. He then revealed himself in his passion for
Antonia something more powerful, greater than love,
a dominant desire for protection so benevolent and so
guardian that one would not paint otherwise that of the angel of
light which watches over the guard of virtue, and which escorts it since
the cradle to the grave. It was also the kind of ascendant
that he exercised on this young girl, and that one could not compare
to nothing in the order of purely human relations. Imagination
tender and a little superstitious Antonia had not forgotten this
idea in the crowd of hypotheses that incomprehensible existence
de Lothario made him conceive and reject in turn; But
she played with herself and with Mme Alberti, as if
illusion without consequence. Lothario was called, in their
privacy, ANTONIA ANGEL.




IX



Alas! the sweetest prospect that can flatter my heart,
it is annihilation. Oh! don't go wrong, only hope
which remains to me! It seems to me that I would now dare to beg my
judge to annihilate me. Looks to me like I'll find it now
willing to answer me. So, oh lovely thought, so I don't
would be more! I would fall back into the inviolable calm of nothingness,
erased, cut off from the number of beings, forgotten from all
creatures, angels and God himself! Almighty God! me
here is; deign to return me to the chaos from which you pulled me!

KLOPSTOCK.


One day, when the sun was going down, Antonia had entered the church
of St. Mark to pray. The last rays of twilight
expired through the stained-glass windows under the great hangers of the dome,
and were completely extinguished in the recesses of the chapels
distant. We could barely see a few dying reflections shine
the most visible parts of the mosaics of the vault and
walls. From there the growing shadows descended more and more
thick along the strong columns of the nave, and ended
flood with deep and still darkness the uneven surface of
its cobblestones, furrowed like the sea which surrounds them, and which
often even in the holy place to reconquer its empire on the
human usurpations. She saw, a few steps from her, a
kneeling man, whose attitude heralded a soul strongly
concerned. At the same moment one of the clers of the church came to lay
a lamp in front of a miraculous image, suspended in this place,
and the flame stirred by the movement of his march spread around
of him a weak and fleeting clarity, but which suffices for Antonia
to recognize Lothario. He got up in a hurry and he
was about to disappear, when Antonia met his footsteps
on the square. She grabbed his arm, and walked for some time without
talk to him; then, with an effusion full of tenderness:


“What! Lothario, - she said, - what concern you
tormented? Would you blush to be a Christian, and this belief
is she so unworthy of a strong soul that you dare not admit it before
his friends? As for me, the greatest of my sorrows, I can you
assure it, was to doubt your faith, and I feel relieved
death penalty since I'm sure we
recognize the same God, and expect the same future.


- Alas! what are you saying, dear Antonia? - Lothario replied. -
Why must my bad destiny have brought this
explanation! However I will not avoid him: he is too awful
to abuse a soul like yours. The man, poorly organized perhaps,
who does not believe in the religion in which he was born; who, more
still unhappy, does not understand the great intelligence that
rule the world, nor the immortal life of the soul, is more worthy
of pity than of horror; but if he hid his unbelief under
pious practices, if he worshiped only to deceive everyone
what the world adores, if his superb reason disavowed the homage
which he gives to public worship at the very moment he prostrates himself
with the faithful, this man would be a monster of hypocrisy, the
most treacherous and odious of creatures. See my
heart in all its infirmity and in all its misery. Balance
since childhood between the need and the impossibility of believing;
devoured with thirst for another life and impatience to get there
rise, but pursued by the conviction of nothingness, as of a
fury attached to my existence, I have long, often, everywhere
sought that God that my despair implores, in the churches, in
temples, mosques, schools of philosophers and
priests, in all of nature, who show it to me and who
refuse! When the night, already late, allows me to penetrate under these
vaults, and to humiliate myself without being seen on the steps of this
sanctuary, I come here to beg God to communicate himself to me. My
voice begs it, my heart calls it, and nothing answers me. More
frequently, because then I'm more sure not to cheat on a
witness by misinterpreted demonstrations, it is in the middle
of the woods, it is on the sand of the shores, it is lying on a
boat abandoned in the sea, that I invoke this light from the sky,
whose gentle influence would cure me of all my ills! How much
times and with what fervor, O heaven, I bowed down to
this immense creation by asking its author! How much i have
shed tears of rage, when, descending into my heart, I
found only doubt, ignorance and death! Antonia, you
tremble to hear me! Forgive me, pity me, and
rest assured! The blindness of an unfortunate, disowned by heaven,
proves nothing against the faith of a simple soul. Believe, Antonia! your
God exists, your soul is immortal, your religion is true.
But this God has distributed his graces and his punishments with
the far-sighted intelligence which reigns in all his works. He has
given the foreknowledge of immortality to pure souls for whom
immortality is done. To the souls he has devoted in advance to
nothing, he only showed nothing.


- Nothingness! - cried Antonia; - Lothario, do you think about it? Ah! my
friend, your soul is not devoted to nothingness! You will believe, if not
that one moment, only one moment; but the moment will come when
immortality will be felt in Lothario's reason, as in his
heart! Lothario's soul would be mortal, Almighty God! and to
of what use would the whole creation be, if Lothario's soul
had to finish? Oh! for me, - she continued more calmly,
- I feel that I will live, that I will never end, that I
will own everything that was so dear to me, in a future without
vicissitude, my father, my mother, my good sister .., and I know that
all the pains of the most painful life, all the trials
to which Providence can subject a weak creature in
this short passage from birth to death will never reduce me
to absolute despair, because eternity remains for me to love and
to be loved!


- To love! Antonia, - said Lothario. - What man is worthy
to be loved by you! "


He finished these words by entering Madame Alberti's living room,
who smiled meaningfully at him. Lothario smiles too, but
it was not from this enchanting smile that a distraction
happy sometimes took him away; it was with a bitter smile and
pain that seemed foreign to his face.


Antonia began to find an explanation for the deep
Lothario's sadness. She understood how this unfortunate,
deprived of the sweetest favor of Providence, of the happiness of
know God and love him, and cast to earth as a
aimless traveler, had to look forward to providing this career
useless and longing for when to get out of it forever. he
moreover seemed that he was alone in the world, because he did not speak
never from his parents. If he had once known a mother, he
would undoubtedly have named her. For a man who was not bound by
no feeling, this immense void in which his soul was immersed
could fail to be frightening and terrible, and Antonia, who
had never supposed that a creature could fall into this excess
of misery and loneliness, did not contemplate it without fear.
She reflected especially with an extreme pang of heart at
this idea of ​​Lothario, that there was for certain beings
reprobate of God a predestination of nothingness which made their
woe in this world of the conviction not to live again in a
other. She thought for the first time of this dreadful nothingness, of
the deep, to the immeasurable horror of this separation
eternal; she put herself in the place of the unfortunate who did not see
in life than a succession of partial deaths that result
to complete death, and in the most delicious affections
than the fleeting illusion of two hearts of ash; she imagined the
terror of the husband who presses his beloved wife in his arms,
when it comes to thinking that after a few years, a few
days perhaps, all the centuries will be between them, and that each
moment of this passing present is a down payment given to the future
unending; and in this painful meditation she felt the
the same feeling as a poor and weak child, lost in the woods,
who, from error to error, and from detours to detours, would be
arrived, with no means of recognizing his trace and returning to his
not, to the rapid inclination of a precipice. Absorbed in these
reflections, as if in a painful dream, she had risen from her
seat, while Mrs. Alberti and Lothario looked at her
silence, and she had reached her room. Hardly was she there
when his heart, freed from all external constraints,
submitted without resistance to the oppression that overwhelmed him, and tasted the
freedom to suffer with a sort of pleasure. Until then the
passions had exercised little sway over her, and the very love that
Mrs. Alberti loved to see her develop in her for Lothario not there
was not manifested by those thunderstorms that accompany the feelings
exalted, which increase the action of life, and which
all the faculties at their highest degree of power. She
had conceived that she loved Lothario, and this persuasion full of
gentleness and abandon had cost nothing to his happiness. But this
thought of annihilation or damnation, damnation,
the annihilation of Lothario, stirred up in his heart the ideas
most tumultuous and filled him with confusion and
terror.


"What, - she said, - beyond this life so quickly
nothing elapsed! nothing more for him! and it is he who thinks it! and
it is he who says it! and it is he who threatens us not to see him again
never in the place where we will meet again to never leave each other!


" Nothingness! What then is nothingness? and what
eternity if Lothario is not there? "


While she was trying to realize this thought, she
had unknowingly drawn near to her Christ, and her hand
leaned on one of the woods of the cross. She looked up, and
fell to his knees:


" My God! my God! - she cried, - you to whom space and
eternity belong, you who can do everything and who love so much,
have you done nothing for Lothario? "

As she said these words, Antonia felt herself faint; but she was
recalled to her by the impression of a supporting hand,
that of Mme Alberti, who had left Lothario to follow her,
for fear that she would be ill .....


"Calm down, poor Antonia," said Mme Alberti to him; - your
ancestors gave princes to the East, and your fortune is counted
by millions. You will be Lothario's wife, when he is a son
King's.


- What does it matter? - answered Antonia with a bewildered air, - who cares if he
does not rise again? "


Mrs. Alberti, who could not understand the meaning of these words,
shook his head in pain, like a self-confirmed person
despite herself in a sad conviction that she has for a long time and
unnecessarily pushed back:


“Unhappy child! - she said hugging her and
watering her with her tears - how you hurt your sister! Ah!
if heaven reserves you for this misfortune, may I at least die
before witnessing it! "




X


We are deceived without having enjoyed; there are still desires, and
we no longer have illusions. The imagination is rich, abundant and
wonderful; the poor, dry and disenchanted existence. We live
with a full heart an empty world, and without having used anything we are
disillusioned with everything.

CHATEAUBRIAND.


Lothario's intimacy had become a need for Antonia, whom
the hope of returning his heart to faith ignited with zeal
full of tenderness, and who already loved her dearly before
confessed that she loved him. She was no less precious to Madame
Alberti, who, more and more worried about the fate of a young
girl without support, who entered the world, with an organization
weakling, failing health, and an extreme disposition to endure
painfully all strong impressions, did not conceive of
possibility of ensuring him some happiness by giving him
find, in a strongly felt affection, a protection of
more against the wrinkles of life. She saw a big
advantage of helping early the almost maternal attachment
that she had for her sister, the help of a more tender feeling
even more far-sighted, as Antonia doubtless had
inspired in Lothario, though, by a singularity difficult to
to define, he avoided relating what he felt so evidently to
no particular being. It looked like it had formed in a
higher world some admirable type of perfection whose
Antonia's figure and character only reminded him of the
memory, and that if he fixed his gaze on her with a
attention so lively and so tender, it was because his features woke up
a reminiscence whose object was not on earth. This
circumstance had maintained in their relationship a sort of
painful mystery, which was a burden to all, but that time alone
could clear up. Antonia was quite happy besides
the friendship of a man like Lothario; and his soul, shy and
defiant, who well understood another happiness, would not have dared
to desire. Her life was embellished with the idea that she occupied life
of Lothario, and that she had taken in the thoughts of this man
extraordinary a place that nobody, perhaps, shared
with her. As for Lothario, his melancholy increased every
days, and increased above all by what seemed peculiar to the
dispel. Often, shaking hands with Madame Alberti,
resting his eyes on Antonia's sweet smile, he had spoken of
his departure with a stifled sigh, and his eyelids were
wet with tears.


This melancholy disposition of the mind which was common to them
kept them away from public places and noisy pleasures to which
the Venetians are engaged during the greater part of the year.
Their time was usually spent walking on the lagoons,
in the islands that are scattered there, or in the pretty villages of the
Mainland bordering the elegant banks of the Brenta.
However, of all the places they liked to meet, there
was none that offered them more charms than an island
narrow and elongated, which the inhabitants of Venice call the
Lido, or the shore, because it in fact ends the lagoons of
side of the great sea, and that it is like their limit. Nature
seems to have imprinted on this place a particular character of
sadness, solemnity, which only awakens feelings
tender, which only excites serious and dreamy ideas. From the side
only where it has a view of Venice, the Lido is covered with gardens,
pretty orchards, simple but picturesque little houses.
On the beautiful festive days of the year, it is the meeting place for people
of the people, who come here to relax from the fatigue of the week,
through games and country dances. From there, Venice develops
to the eyes in all its magnificence; the canal, covered with
gondolas, presents in its vast extent the image of a river
immense, which bathes the foot of the ducal palace and the steps of
Saint-Marc. A bitter thought grips the heart, when we can distinguish
below its majestic domes the walls blackened by time
of the state inquisition, and when we try to count separately
the countless victims of a worried and jealous tyranny that
these dungeons have devoured.


Going up towards the crest of the Lido, one feels attracted by the aspect
of a grove of oaks which occupies all the most
high, which extends as a curtain of greenery above the landscape, or
which is divided here and there into cool and shady groups. One would believe
at first glance, that this place, favorable to pleasure, does not
contains other mysteries than those of pleasure; he is dedicated
to the mysteries of death. A great number of scattered graves,
loaded with singular and unintelligible characters for the
Most walkers seem to announce the last rest of a
people erased from the earth, who left no other
monuments. This imposing idea which brings together, which confuses with the
feeling of the brevity of life, that of the antiquity of
time, has something larger and more austere than that
that is born on the funeral stone of a man we have known
living; but it is only a mistake. We didn't do a few
not just the meeting of a whiter stone, adorned with a
more modern way, and often still sown with scarcely
faded that conjugal love, filial piety in
mourning dispels this illusion. These unknown letters are
borrowed from the language of a nation to which God has promised not to
end, and who lives separate from the men with whom she has never
not even the right to mix its dust. It is the cemetery of
Jews. Going back down on the opposite side of Venice, suddenly the
trees become rarer, powdery and withered grass does not
points out more than space to space; the vegetation
disappears altogether, and the foot sinks into a light sand,
mobile, silvery, which covers all this side of the Lido, and which ends in
the great sea. Here the point of view changes entirely, or rather
the stray eye on a boundless space searches uselessly for these
forests of superb steeples, these dazzling domes, these monuments
sumptuous, these elegantly decked buildings, these agile gondolas,
who, a moment before, occupied him with so many distractions
shiny and flattering. There is not a reef, not a school of
sand which rests it in this extended wave. It is no longer the
flat and opaque surface of the quiet channels which do not wrinkle the
more often than under the light oar of the gondolier, and which
embellish, with their equal course, streets where each house is a
palace fit for kings. These are the stormy waves of the sea
independent of the sea which does not receive the laws of man,
and which bathes indiscriminately opulent cities or strikes
barren and deserted.


This kind of idea was of a very serious nature to the soul
shy of Antonia, but she had gradually become familiar with
the darkest scenes and images, because she knew
that Lothario took pleasure in it, and that he did not taste gently,
with fullness, the charm of a collected conversation, that in
the most rustic solitudes. Enemy of the forms of the world that
constrained, which suppressed the expansion of its ardent
sensitivity, he was not really him until the circle of
society was crossed, and that, alone with nature and friendship,
he could give a career to the impetuosity of his thoughts, often
bizarre, always energetic and frank, sometimes tall and
wild as the desert that inspired him. It is then especially that
Lothario seemed more than a man. It is
when, free from the conveniences that make man smaller, he seemed
take possession of a creation from time to time , and breathe in the weight of
social institutions in a place where they did not have
penetrated. Leaning against a tree without a crop, on a ground that
not of the traveler have never trod, he reminded of something
the beauty of Adam after his fault. Several times Antonia had it
considered in this situation at this upper part of the Lido
where the Israelite cemetery is located. From there, while he
looked alternately on Venice and the sea, his
physiognomy so mobile, so animated, so expressive, painted what
was happening in him with as much clarity, as much precision as
the speech. We read in his eyes the painful rapprochement that
made his mind of these intermediate tombs between a world
tumultuous and eternal monotony of the seas with the end of the
life of man, who is also placed, perhaps, between a
aimless agitation and endless inaction. His sight stopped
painfully at the last limits of the horizon on the side of the
gulf, as if it had sought to push them back further, and
to find beyond that some proof against nothingness. One day Antonia,
penetrated by this idea as if he had communicated it to her,
rushed up to him from the mound where she was sitting; and,
grabbing her hand with all the strength she was capable of:


“God, God! - she cried, pointing her finger at the line
indecisive where the last wave mingled with the first cloud ... - he
is here! "


Lothario, less surprised than touched to have been understood, pressed her
against her breast.


"God would be lacking in all nature, - he replied, - let him be
would find in Antonia's heart. "


Madame Alberti, witness to all their interviews, took less
of interest to those who turned to these great objects of
meditation, because she believed without effort, with naive faith,
and that she had never supposed that one could question the
only ideas on which are based happiness and hopes
of man. Some circumstances had given rise to
believe that Lothario's religious views were not
agree in everything with those of Antonia; but she was far from
think that it extended to the fundamental principles of its
belief, and this little lack of harmony between two hearts that
wanted to unite worried him very slightly. However perfect it was
Lothario, she felt he could be wrong, but she was
sure that a man as perfect as Lothario could not
always deceive.




XI


I cringe when I see the injustices happening
commit, and how we persecute poor miserable people in the name
justice and laws.

GOETHE.


One day their walk ended later than usual, at
an hour when the darkness that was beginning to spread over the sea
let Venice distinguish more than the scattered lights of its
buildings, in the silence where all nature rested, and where
the ear easily seized the slightest noise, that
of Antonia was suddenly struck with an extraordinary cry which
was nothing new to her, however, and that made her wince.
She remembered hearing him at the Farnedo the day she went there.
had met an old Morlaque poet, and since then
from Duino Castle, when the Armenian monk had rushed to
among the robbers and scattered them before him. She is
drew near to his sister by an involuntary movement, and sought
Lothario's eye who was standing at the bow of the gondola. Little
afterwards, this noise was repeated, but it started from a point much
closer, and at the same instant the gondola experienced a
violent, as if she had been touched by another. Lothario
was no longer there. Antonia cried out and stood up hastily.
the caller. The gondola remained motionless. A great noise that is
was next fixed his attention, and changed his dread to
curiosity. She could distinguish very well, in this confused rumor,
Lothario's voice speaking with authority in the midst of a
handful of men assembled on an open boat. He does not
took a moment to realize that these men were
disguised henchmen who took a prisoner to Venice, and who
complained that they had been made to lose their prey. Indignant, in
effect, of the violence that was done to this wretch, and not seeing,
in the rigorous treatment he experienced, that an odious abuse
of force, Lothario had rushed on the building, and had
delivered the stranger by throwing him into the sea from where he could
swim to a neighboring edge. The minions first broke out in
reproaches and threats, for this prisoner was very important;
we even had reason to think that he was an emissary of
Jean Sbogar, and they expected a great price for their capture;
but they returned in respectful silence recognizing
Lothario, whose mysterious influence acted as a brake, in these
time of crisis, to all the excesses of power. After having them
addressed a few words of contempt, he let fall in the midst of them
a handful of sequins, and went back peacefully on the gondola where
his return put an end to Antonia's worries. At the moment when
they entered the canal, the singular cry that had warned
some time ago Lothario's attention was heard
again at the point of Judecque. Antonia assumed that the man
that Lothario had just pulled from the hands of the henchmen was approached in
this place, and let his liberator know about it,
to teach him that he had not received a blessing from him
unnecessary. Lothario seemed to experience a lively transport of joy, and this
feeling was communicated to the heart of Antonia, who, through the
vague fear which still occupied him, greatly enjoyed the
perfection of Lothario's soul, whom she had seen always ready to
to revolt against injustice and to devote oneself to misfortune.
She conceived that this invincible impetuosity of feelings
exposed him to sometimes fall into dangerous excesses, but
She did not suppose that one could never blame faults too
noble in their pattern.


Madame Alberti rarely received people, because she had
noticed that this kind of distraction, which consists the most
often in an exchange of mutually intrusive decorum,
did not suit Antonia, whose tastes directed her in all
things. However, that very day, against the ordinary, she
expected a fairly large company, which happened almost at the same time
time it. Already, the noise of the singular incident which came from
happening had spread in the groups of St. Mark's Square,
and popular opinion, always favorable to Lothario, had
presented his driving in the most brilliant light. The people
Venetian, which is apparently the most flexible of all and the most
easy to enslave, this people so submissive, so humble, so caressing
for his masters, is perhaps of all peoples the most jealous
of his freedom; and, in those moments of public turmoil when the
undecided power passed from hand to hand at the mercy of chance, it
enthusiastically attached himself to all that seemed to guarantee
its independence or defend it in the absence of institutions.
The slightest attack on the safety of individuals worried,
revolted his shady irritability, and he was much less
brought to see, in the most legitimate acts of authority, this
that she was doing to maintain her safety, than what she could
make a day to destroy it. Jean Sbogar's name was
arrived in Venice like that of a dangerous and formidable man;
but he had never given alarms, because his troop,
too few to try a hand on a large
city, hardly carried the ravages that fame blamed on it
than in a few villages of Terre-Ferme to which
lagoon dwellers were as foreign as if they had any
been separated by immense seas. An emissary of Jean Sbogar
was therefore not an enemy for Venice, and one could not see
usually in Lothario's action that one of these movements of
energetic generosity which seemed so natural to his character,
and who had already won him the affection of the lower classes
and the esteem of everyone. The conversation turned
naturally on this object in Madame Alberti's circle,
despite the visible embarrassment of Lothario, whose modesty
could not bear the slightest praise without impatience and nothing
only announced this inexhaustible thesis in the style of
Venetian politeness had to end at last
satisfaction of the man who was the object, when Antonia,
tormented by the discomfort manifested by her physiognomy, hastened
to seize a less favorable aspect of this event to relieve
Lothario with the weight of unwelcome admiration.


“If, however, - she said smiling, - Lord Lothario
was mistaken about the object of his generous devotion; if the
bad opinion that he has of the minions had been found this time in
default; if he had added to the misfortune of hindering the action of the laws,
and to oppose them a resistance which is always reprehensible,
that of stealing from the punishment due to him one of these culprits
that no class of society claims, to bring into
the world scared some of those monsters that don't mark
their days only by scoundrels; if he had issued one of the
companions of Jean Sbogar ..., and, I shudder to think of it! Jeans
Sbogar himself! ...


- Jean Sbogar! ... - interrupted Lothario with the accent of
worry and surprise. - But who could think, -
he continued, - that Jean Sbogar, or even one of his family, would have dared
throw in the middle of Venice, aimlessly, without known interest, because this
is not in a big city that these bandits can exercise
openly robbery and assassination? This artifice of minions
is too rude! ...


- It is absurd, - exclaimed Madame Alberti. - We can imagine that a
outlawed from a high order, that the leader of a generous party
enter a city where his judgment is passed, where he is
devoted to death and awaited by the scaffold. When this attempt
would be useless to his cause, how many feelings can there be
determine! But what feeling, what passion would determine a
miserable leader of thieves, whose heart has never beaten
the hope of the booty, to execute such a reckless enterprise? This
is not love, no doubt! Happy or unhappy in his
designs, always sure to inspire the same contempt, of what woman
would he get the looks, if not from those for whom we would be
ashamed of doing anything? Is there someone who understands
the lover of Jean Sbogar?


- Indeed, - said Lothario, - that would be singular.


"Besides," continued Madame Alberti. - who even knows if this
man exists; if his name is not the watchword of a band
as contemptible as the others, but clever enough to
its baseness by the brilliance of some renown?


- On this point, madame, - said a man of advanced age, who had
listened attentively to Madame Alberti as she spoke, and
who had been pointing out for some time the intention of him
answer, - your doubts are unfounded. Jean Sbogar exists very
really, and is not entirely unknown to me. "


The circle tightened, except for Lothario who continued to
pay fairly cool attention to the conversation, according to his
usage, at most that which politeness requires in an interview
whose object is equally indifferent to everyone.


“I am Dalmatian, - continued the stranger, - and born in Spalato


 - To Spalato! - said Lothario, coming closer. - I know
 very much this country.


- Jean Sbogar was born in the vicinity of this city, -
replied the old man, - at least if I are to believe the testimonies which
have come down to me, for that very name is not his name. He took it in
leaving his family, which is one of the noblest and most
illustrious of our province, and which goes back directly to a
Prince of Albania. I will not tell you what determined him to this
approach, but he spent almost a child in the service of the Turks, where he
promptly acquired a great military reputation. The
events not having been favorable to his party, he was obliged
to flee in order to avoid proscription. He returned, they say, in
Dalmatia and found himself there disinherited. Accustomed to a stormy life, and
tormented, it seems, by dark and violent passions, he
seizes the first opportunity to become attached to a state of
permanent revolution. If he had been in one of his
happy positions where activity and genius lead to everything, it is
would perhaps be acquired an honorable reputation. In the absence of
perils which give glory, he embraced those who do not
that contempt and the scaffold. It is a being to be pitied!


- Have you seen him, have you seen Jean Sbogar? - said Antonia.


- I often hugged him when he was a child, -
replied the old man. - It was then a soft and tender soul, and
such a noble and beautiful figure!


- He was beautiful? - exclaimed Madame Alberti.


- Why not? - whispered Lothario. - A beautiful physiognomy is
the expression of a beautiful soul; and that beautiful souls have been
altered, bitter, sometimes degraded by misfortune! that
children were the pride of their mothers, who became the
scum or terror of the world! Satan, the day before his fall, was
the most beautiful of angels! But - he continued raising his voice, -
did you know him older?


- Until ten or twelve, - said the old Dalmatian, - and since
for some time he had become dreamy and lonely. I still have
thought ever since I would recognize him if I ever met him.


- God preserve you, - continued Lothario, - to recognize him on
the bench of assassins! This moment would also be awful for
you and for him ... for him to whom he would recall the memories
of a youth whose promises he denied, and who made
perhaps now his greatest torment!


- In truth, Lothario, - said Antonia, - you are too willing to
sensing similar impressions in others. You do not
do not think that, in Jean Sbogar, they are necessarily
alienated by the sole effect of her habits, and her low soul
and withered would no longer understand them, when it was true, as
it is said, that she could never have understood them! "


Lothario smiles gently at Antonia; then, turning to
the other people who made up the company, and addressing
more particularly to the old man who had just spoken:


"That the guilty is unhappy on earth, - he said in
shaking his head, - since he is hated by such souls, without
that there remains before them a pretext to justify himself or to
soften the rigor of their judgment! It seems to them only one
monster placed quite out of nature by oddity
fierce of its destiny, and which does not hold anything human! It was not
thrown into the ranks of the living only to frighten them and to die. This
unfortunate man had no parents. He did not count any friends. His
heart never beat from a deep feeling of sadness at the sight
of an unhappy man like him. Her tearless eye closed at the
sleep beside the waking and crying misery. Good Lord!
that such a supposition would disturb order for me already if
sad of human society! Ah! I prefer to believe in error
of a false judgment, to the bitterness of a wounded heart, to the reaction
of a noble, but pitiless vanity, which rebelled against
all that bothered her, and which opened a way of blood
among men, to make themselves known as they pass and to
leave a mark.


- I thought so, »said Antonia moved, coming closer to
Lothario and resting his hand on his shoulder.


“Antonia's thought,” he continued, “is always a
revelation from heaven. As for me, I understood well, I felt
often how bitter the miseries of society could
to grieve an energetic soul; I understand the ravages that the passion of
well even would sometimes produce in a fiery heart and
inconsiderate. There are men who are turbulent by calculation, stormy by
interest, whose hypocritical exaltation will never surprise neither my
spirit nor my pity; but, as long as I find loyalty under one
reckless, extravagant or ferocious action, I am quite ready to
make the second of the man who committed it, justice had it
already condemned. "


Antonia withdrew her hand with a sort of dread. Lothario the
grabbed.


"Man belonged to two very different states, but he
in the second won some memories of the first; and every
once a great political upheaval tilts towards his state
the balance of society, he rushes into it with a
incredible ardor, because this is the tendency of his
organization, which always brings him back from an irresistible authority to
the most complete enjoyment of freedom that can be
procure. This feeling can be dreadful in its results; he is
almost always absurd in his combinations, but he holds to the
nature of man, and he is in himself noble and touching. It is
much more still in a worn-out society like those among
where we live, and where all the power, shared for
a few moments between equally precarious institutions which
only have the right to time or who still only have that of
daring, threatens to fall at any time from the hands of recklessness
in those of baseness, and to become the sharing of the last
miserable.


“What! when a people have reached this point; when,
torn from its ancient customs and its ancient laws by a
invincible force, and uncertain of his existence, he puts his
cowardly agony in the arms of the hypocritical jugglers who
caress to inherit his last remains; when the
society, so close to its ruin, hardly rests among the
wicked than on interests, among decent people only on
some moral rules that will cease to exist, it will be
forbidden to the strong man who finds in him, and in the impulse
that he is able to give to others the guarantee, the only
guarantee of the rights of the entire species, ... he will be prohibited from
to gather all his faculties against the ascendancy of the
destruction, against the progress of death! I know well that this
man will not fly the standard of ordinary societies. The
ordinary societies would repel him, for he would speak to them a
language which they do not understand and which is forbidden to them
to hear. To serve them, he must separate himself from them, and the
war that he declares to them is the first guarantee of
the independence that they will one day find under its auspices,
when the hand which maintains the states has withdrawn altogether.
So these despicable brigands, the object of disgust and horror
nations, will become its arbiters, and their scaffolds will
will change into altars.


"This is not a paradox here, - continued Lothario, - it is a
induction drawn from the history of peoples, and which is based on
the example of all centuries. Who would not see a very
natural order of things in this spirit of renewal
which manifests itself at the end of a civilization, and which kills it for
to rejuvenate it? because after all nations only rejuvenate in this way,
less if experience is to be believed. And you believe in the
Providence, and you dare to blame its means! When a volcano purifies
the earth by covering your countryside with steaming lava, you say
that God willed it; and you do not believe that God has clothed
special mission these men of blood and terror who wear out,
who break the springs of the social state to start it all over again!
Search your memory for the founders of the companies
news, and you will see that these men are robbers like
those you condemn! What were, I ask you, these
Theseus, these Pirithoüs, these Romulus who marked the passage of
barbarian ages to the heroic age over which they presided; Hercules
himself whose name has been revered among the weak,
because the strong never had a more formidable enemy, and
whose anger was directed only at kings and gods? The
priests consecrated the memory of his labors, and he
awarded the apotheosis, although he was bastard, thief, murderer
and suicide. I saw, in my trip to Athens, the mountain on
which Mars was put on trial for assassination. "


While Lothario spoke, Antonia sat down, and the
watched with an indefinable feeling. Madame Alberti was taking
a less lively part in her speeches, but she enjoyed them as
of a singular and new idea; and such was the empire over her
of these ideas, which he often made him forget how much they
were in opposition to the feelings she had received from
his education, or that his own reason had inspired him.


The character of Lothario, known moreover by an independence a
not very shy, and by a marked inclination for opinions which do not
did not bear the seal of power and more shameful approval
still of the multitude, lent an interest to his expressions
spicy and singular; his position in the world was such that
could not see in his most bizarre and the most
chance that a whim of his imagination. This impression was
so general when he had spoken that it was rare that we tried to
contradict him. We were grateful to him for the outpouring of his heart,
the abandonment of his movements. He was not asked to account for it.
This conversation was long over, and Lothario,
absorbed, no longer took part in the indifferent conversation,
the cold exchange of insignificant sentences that had succeeded it. The
head resting on his hand, he fixed a dark eye on Antonia,
who had changed places without noticing it to get closer
of him, and who seemed struck by a painful thought.


"Lothario, - she said in a low voice, holding out her hand,"
your love for the weak and the unfortunate carries you away
sometimes to say things that you wouldn't approve of after
having thought about it. Beware of enthusiasm that certain
circumstances could make it disastrous for your happiness,
happiness of those who love you.


- From those who love me! - exclaimed Lothario ... - Ah! if I was
love! if I could have been! if the world had been known to me; if the
gaze of a woman worthy of my heart had fallen on my heart
before misfortune had withered him! ... How strange
guess! ... "


Antonia had come closer to isolate Lothario, or to
hear it better. His hand was crossed in his.


"Yes, - resumed Lothario, - if a woman intended for me
had allowed my miserable life a feeling that resembled
love; if a being who had approached Antonia, who had
approached from afar like the shadow of reality, had taken me then
under the protection of his pity ...; if I could have breathed without
desecration the air agitated by the folds of her dress, or the waves of
her hair...; if my lips had dared to tell you: Antonia, I
love you!... "


Society was flowing. Antonia, trembling, had stopped
understand its position. She remained motionless, and Madame Alberti
had returned; but Lothario hadn't changed his language. he
repeated his last sentence with a darker expression, and
drew Madame Alberti towards her sister with a cry of pain.


“What are you doing, - he said, - what are you doing with Lothario?
Do you know Lothario, or rather this stranger, this man from
chance which has no name? And you, the sister of this child,
do you know that I love her, and that my love kills? "


Antonia smiled bitterly.


This connection of ideas did not make itself felt in his mind; But
she saw in it a painful omen.


Madame Alberti was not surprised. These expressions were not for
her than that of exalted love, as Lothario must have felt,
and as she had often imagined it. She squeezed his hand
of Lothario, looking at him in a loving way, for him
testify that it depended on him to be happy, and that he
would find no obstacle to his wishes in the one person who
could still exercise some sway over her sister's resolutions.
Antonia's feelings, encouraged by this admission, are
demonstrated with more abandon. She painted them with a look,
the first look in her eyes that love would have animated.


“Woe to me! Said Lothario in a muffled voice, and he
disappeared.


The sound of an oar hitting the canal disturbed the dreary silence
that had followed his departure. Antonia rushed to the window. The
the moon lit up Lothario's floating plume with one of its rays,
who was dressed in the Venetian style that day. The appearance of the sky, the
movement of the air, the hour, the instant, some other circumstance
perhaps, Antonia reminded us, the appearance of this brigand
unknown she had seen leaving the pier of Saint-Charles. His heart
gave only a moment to this memory of terror. Whatever the motive
secret of Lothario's trouble, he had told her that he loved her, and
his tenderness was to protect her against all perils.




XII


Ah! delicious land! if there was some stay suitable for
to calm the sorrows of a sorry heart a little, to heal the wounds
profound effects made by the features of sorrow, and to recall the
first illusions of life, it would probably be you who
would offer it! Your enchanting appearance, your lonely woods, your air
pure and balsamic have the power to calm all kinds of
sadness ... out of despair.

CHARLOTTE SMITH.


Madame Alberti spent the night and part of the following day at
look for interpretations of Lothario's mysterious speeches.
She did not find any which changed the slightest thing in her
provisions. A perhaps obscure birth, a fortune
perhaps disturbed by excessive lavishness, great
political or private misfortunes that kept him forever distant
of his homeland, such were the various
which his imagination stopped, and none of them
gave birth to the idea of ​​a well-founded obstacle to Antonia's happiness. The
Lothario's very resistance was then explained by feelings
so delicate and so honorable that she did not hesitate on the means
triumph over it.


After a few moments of conversation with Antonia, she allowed him to
to dispose of his hand in favor of Lothario, and to give him
news herself, convinced that her generous scruples
would not resist love. Antonia, more fearful and threatened
by dark feelings she had kept used to
since childhood, never to taste the happiness that
presented the images, waited with more anxious impatience
may that day have passed. It seemed to him that Lothario did not
would not return, that she had seen him for the last time.


He returned, however.


His sad and tired physiognomy announced meditations
painful. Her complexion was leaden. His eye had lost the sweetness
ordinary of its expression; he painted the worried vague and
stormy of a sick imagination. He sat down next to Antonia and
stared fixedly; Madame Alberti was busy at some distance
and deliberately avoided their conversation. This situation
had something difficult for the shy organization and
weak of Antonia. She was trying to smile, and a tear was rolling
in his eyes. Her heart was beating with great violence.
Sometimes she turned away from Lothario, and then she
was astonished, coming back to himself, to find him in this
motionless and sinister contemplation where she had left it. She
wanted to say a few words, but she barely stammered
confused sounds, and Lothario did not inquire into what she
had meant. The care with which he covered her with his
gaze had something of a prestige and a night vision.
Finally she managed to break part of that spell, telling him


"So you are unhappy, Lothario? ..."


This question was linked, by an imperceptible relation, to their
last interview, but it was rather the expression of a
painful feeling that resulted from what she was experiencing then,
than a transition prepared for what she had promised to say.


Lothario did not answer.


“However, - she continued, - you would be too cruel to
those who love you ...


- Those who love me! - said Lothario, covering his head with his
hands. - Always those who love me! My bad angel got you
taught there a magic phrase that grieves my soul.


- I was coming back to it on purpose, - replied Antonia, - because I don't know
no absolute woe for the man who is loved; and if so
your fate, Lothario, that many affections have deceived
your tenderness, that many congratulations have escaped your
hopes, it was never so much, my friend, that you have
no longer found with you this precious compensation which
compensates a sensitive heart for all pain; you know it,
Lothario, you are loved. "


Lothario looked at Antonia again, but the character of his
physiognomy was quite changed. No one noticed in him
than a mixture of uneasy joy, astonishment and terror which
did not belong to his features.


“Lothario, - she continued, - I don't know your family,
neither your rank nor your fortune, and it matters little to me to know
all of this; but I was told that the hand of this Antonia which you
desire to occupy the heart was not to be despised by anyone, under
none of these reports; and Antonia, free of her choice,
would stop that on you.


- On me! Lothario cried with a sort of fury.


Madame Alberti approached.


" On me! and it's you, it's Antonia who overwhelms me with a
so bitter mockery!


- Lothario, - replied Antonia in a tone of cold dignity, - you
despise Antonia, or you didn't understand her.


- Despise Antonia! What does this language mean? What do I have
speak? Of a marriage, if I'm not mistaken, and it's you ... "


Antonia leaned on her sister. She cried.


“My daughter, - said Madame Alberti, - respect her secrets. He doesn't
would repel point if an invincible obstacle, another link
perhaps... "


Lothario interrupted him.


“Ah! be careful not to believe it. Born to love Antonia, and for
to love only her, I did not commit my freedom to any other
affection ... And if his hand could be the price of love - or
courage, it is to me, I swear, that it would belong; but of
what right and under what conditions! Under what conditions, big
God! and what man would dare to propose them! Vengeance from heaven, that
you are formidable! Listen to me, haven't you heard,
- haven't we spoken to you - a little while ago of a man
who is called - Lothario - that must be his name! and the wife of
Lothario, in which palace, do you know, in which areas he
would present her to her vassals! "


Antonia sat down. A deadly shudder froze his limbs. Glimmers
horrible appeared to his mind which rebelled against
they. She sought to penetrate this impenetrable mystery; and all
what she could make out was that it was deep and
awful. Lothario moved away, approached her in turn.
Sometimes his features bore the imprint of delirium,
sometimes they seemed to relax and decompose under a
irresistible force. For some time he had been pensive and
beaten down. Suddenly her forehead cleared, her eyes came alive,
a sudden idea which reconciled him with hope burst upon his
physiognomy. He fell to Antonia's knees; and pressing with
transport his hands and those of Madame Alberti by bathing them
tears:


"If, however, - he said, - I had been the world for her and for
you!


- The world? - answered Antonia.


- She and you! - continued Madame Alberti. - All my life was
in that thought.


- It would be true! - cried Lothario, as if overwhelmed under the weight
of a happiness he had never expected; - it would be true, and I
could start a new existence with you, take my
name and my destiny among men - I could! But
must ... how dare I submit what I love ... So the
want my fatal star? It's far from here, far from the cities, in a
a country where you would needlessly enjoy the shine of a great name and
of great fortune; - but where now I would devote my life
whole ... Ah! let me rest a while under the
feelings that oppress me! "


Lothario was silent for a few minutes, then he
rose; and, resuming his speech with more calm, he spoke
so:


"While still young, I already felt with bitterness the evils of
society, who have always rebelled my soul, who have sometimes
drawn into excesses that Antonia reproached me with yesterday, and which I
have expiated all too painfully. By instinct rather than by
right, I fled the cities and the people who inhabit them; because
I hated them, not knowing how much one day I must hate them.
The mountains of Carniola, the forests of Croatia, the strikes
wild and almost uninhabited poor Dalmatians, stared
in turn my race worries. I stayed little in the places where
the empire of society had grown; and still moving back
in front of his progress which indignant the independence of my heart, I
all I wanted was to escape it entirely. There is a point
of these countries, common landmark of modern civilization and
of an ancient civilization which left deep traces, the
corruption and slavery: Montenegro is as if placed in
borders of two worlds, and I do not know what vague tradition
had given me reason to believe that he was not part of either
the other. It is a European oasis, isolated by rocks
inaccessible, and by special customs that contact with
other peoples did not corrupt. I knew the language of
Montenegrins. I had spoken to a few of them,
when needs that never increase, and that never change
never of nature, had brought by chance in our cities. I
had a sweet idea of ​​the life of these savages who
have been sufficient for so many centuries, and which, for so many centuries,
have been able to maintain their independence by carefully defending themselves
of the approach of civilized men. Indeed, their situation is
such that no interest, no ambition can call in their
deserts this troop of greedy brigands who invade the earth
to exploit it. The curious alone and the learned have sometimes
attempted access to these solitudes, and they found the death they
were going to carry there; because the presence of the social man is mortal
to a free people who enjoy the purity of their feelings
natural. It was therefore difficult to enter; I succeeded
however, thanks to clothing similar to theirs and
used to their language. Besides, they were not men
that I was going to look for, it was an independent land where
never heard the voice of a human power founded on others
rights as paternity. I had measured my needs, those of a
a fiery-headed adolescent, who always believes himself to be sufficient, because
that, in some moment of bitter intoxication, he thought he felt that
all ailments are insufficient for his heart, and that
God made him alone of his kind. I didn't need my ambition
than a cabin against the harsh cold of winter, a tree
fruit tree and a fountain. I wandered for a long time on the only trace of
wild beasts, through the varied groups of the mountains
Clementines, fleeing from afar the smoke of man's houses, in
which a feeling that the Montenegrins have
reciprocally made me see an enemy everywhere.


"I will not paint you the strong impressions that I received
of that great and imposing nature that has never been subdued, and
whose benefits are sufficient for a population fortunately enough
rare to be exempted from soliciting them. I won't tell you
with what joy I stole a nourishing root from the earth,
without fear of harming the greed of a greedy farmer, or
to deceive the hope of a family of starving laborers, and
to hear this fatal word resound which always reminds me, as
one of your writers, the usurpation of the land: This is my field
! One day at last, how will I express the inexplicable mixture of
feelings which followed one another in me! the sun was setting in
the most beautiful season of the year, he lay down at the end
of an immense valley shaded on all sides by groves
fig trees, pomegranate trees and oleanders, and that
covered, from time to time, small isolated houses,
but surrounded by the most beautiful, the happiest cultures. It is
a painting that belonged, it is true, to the state of society,
but to the society of the first age. In no time, in any place,
the farmer's house had flattered my eyes in one aspect
more agreable. Never had my imagination dreamed so much
prosperity for the villager's home. I then designed the
reports full of charms of the man loved by man, and useful to
his happiness without being necessary to him, in an agricultural tribe; I
regretted not having lived when civilization
was that at this point, or not to be allowed to enjoy it in the
people who tasted its sweetness. Soon I shudder to think,
reminding me that the laws of such a society should be
terrible, and that the stranger who defiled the territory
could wait until death. My blood was boiling with indignation
against myself at the moment when, in the veins of another, he
would be frozen with terror. - Ah! woe to the layman, I cried,
which would bring here the vices and false sciences of Europe,
if I had a mother, a sister or a mistress! He would pay dearly
the insult he has done to the air I breathe by poisoning him with
his breath. "


"A Montenegrin heard me, because I had expressed myself in his
language. "


"These are also our laws, - he said to me, taking my hand,"
and those who like you go down to our valleys
heights of Montenègre, whose external barriers are
almost insurmountable to foreigners, are not always admitted to
live among merited shepherds. The difference in our customs
separate enough, since you are hunters and warriors,
and that you would hardly agree to share the sweet
habits and the quiet life of our pastors; only, not to
not to hinder the natural freedom of men, by abusing the power
that we exercise on our children, we sometimes allow
the exchange of those whom their inclination calls to defend our
mountains, against those of you who have simpler tastes
make ambition the peaceful works of our fields; And this
free trade in men and feelings maintains our relationship
with our neighbors, despite the difference in our customs. So since
centuries, the warlike Montenegrins envelop our mountains
with a belt of formidable men, and protect these fields, which
feed them in turn, when nature refuses to provide
their needs, which rarely happens. You are probably a
children of our brothers, and all this great space, -
he continued, pointing to an isolated corner of the valley,
delicious in appearance, and already covered with the hopes of
rich harvest - it all belongs to you, whoever you are. Yes
you choose a bride from among our daughters; if she gives you
children, and your domain is no longer enough for you, we
will enlarge it due to your need, except to make
in proportion to nature what you can do without
when your family will have spread out in our mountains; because at
other peoples are judged by the prosperity of families and
villages to the extent of cultures, and here we measure it on
the extent of land that remains fallow, and whose needs
early, signs of a too large population, did not make
the necessary operation. From this moment you are
pastor deserves; you are free, and there is between you and
we have no obligation other than that of mutual aid and
hospitality, on the rare occasions when some event
unexpectedly may make them necessary. If you don't have any needs
current, go and take possession of your domain; other,
turn to us, and nothing will miss you that nature
grant to the desires of a simple man. "


As he finished these words, he was preparing to leave me, but a
unbearable idea corrupted my happiness and made me incapable
to enjoy it. It was a part of my life to make myself known, but
something more compelling than the best interests of my life
forbade to receive the hospitable kindness of these mountain people
a blessing that was not intended for me.

“My brother,” I said to him, “you are deceived by appearances.
I was born outside the Clementine mountains; I looked there
freedom. Everything proves to me that I would have found there the only goods that
I desire on earth the free enjoyment of the air, the sky and
from my heart ; but this paradise that you offer me belongs to a
man happier than me. I am only in this grove
stranger whom you have the right to punish. "


Le Morlaque looked at me.


“Young man,” he said after a moment of silence, “we don't know
not be wrong at your age, but at your age are we of course not
deceive oneself? May you be disillusioned with the world you are leaving
and be forever! Do not worry elsewhere. Young like you
and then a stranger like you in Montenegro, I went there to find a
asylum, and the same benevolence welcomed me among these pastors
from which I was also afraid of being pushed back. Go, - he continued with
a kind of authority, - take possession of the land that I have for you
shown. It did not belong to any particular man, but to the
first come, and we are not at the point of having to
suppress the excess of an embarrassing population. One hundred families
occupy here a territory which would suffice for a people. Children
of your children will grow there without being dependent on their neighbors and
without suffering from the aspect of misery. Farewell, - he said to me. -
Work, pray, and enjoy the peace of your heart. "


"I was left alone, happy with the feeling of my freedom, and master
of fertile soil that hardly required any work that their
ease and success always turned into pleasure. My
wilderness was watered by the waters of an abundant stream
which, from time to time swelled by thunderstorms, cascaded
from the top of my rocks, and went to bathe far away from the orchards
too rich for my needs, but the fruits of which attracted
innumerable families of traveling birds. I was enjoying with
delights of the pleasure of shielding these passing guests from my gardens
against the unforeseen vicissitudes of the seasons; happy when i
delighted the bee itself, the bee suddenly seized by a
evening breeze, to the deadly action of the cold, and when I
reported, warmed by my breath, in the hollow of the rock
solitary where she used to find her shelter. I lived
thus two years without communicating with anyone! I had ten-
eight then, and the habit of a rural life had developed my
forces so as to amaze myself.


"I was happy, I repeat, happy because I was free,
because I was sure I was, and I don't know anything more
suitable to fill the heart of man with delicious emotions that
that thought he so rarely enjoys. How everything enchanted me,
as everything made me beside myself in the contemplation of the
nature! Often however I was tormented by a need
inconceivable to be loved, and the distressing persuasion that ever
a woman of my choice would not come to these deserts to associate with
my fate. I felt then that the most tender feeling can
to turn to fury in a passionate heart. I overwhelmed the world
who possessed this unknown treasure of all the hatred that I would have
brought to a happy rival. I dreamed with spite, with a jealousy
anger, to these young girls dazzled by the finery of fashion and
flattery of a few effeminate worshipers, who had left
fall on me a disdainful look because of my darkness or
my too great youth. I felt with a kind of rage that he
would be sweet to undeceive them one day from the prejudices of their
vanity, spilling blood under their eyes or scaring them
the light of a fire ... Pardon, Antonia, for the delirium of a
crazy youth abandoned to its passions.


"I was purposely looking for mountain bears to attack them
with a stake which was the only weapon I had, and I
regretted that these women were not obliged to come to
take refuge, trembling with terror, under the protection of my arm,
because I saw them everywhere. I did not frequent the
other merited shepherds, who hardly saw each other
between them; but I was known by some courage and by a
great physical strength that chance had sometimes given me
try before their eyes.


"The oddity of my appearance, the absolute isolation in which
I was living, and from which no circumstance had brought me out, this
which was mainly brought back from my vigor and my audacity, had
acquired this popular credit that the savages give to
the extraordinary like civilized men.


"One day the Clementine mountains were taken over by
foreign troops. Some adventurous detachments came there
pass away. They were supported by an army that did not try to control them.
to follow, but which threatened our solitudes for a time. The bocage of
lower plateau where I lived is almost inaccessible. That there
would come to seek the greed of neighboring peoples?
But many of our brethren outside were dead; we
we got up to replace them. The chance of the battle delivered me
prisoner to our enemies, despite my resolve. I had everything
made to die, for life wearied me; but I lost the
acquaintance with blood, and I was dragged away. It would be
very long and very useless to tell.


"What my life has become since is another mystery that he
may need to explain. But how many times does the memory of
this inviolable and delicious asylum, which I acquired in a
new society, beyond the powers and laws of the earth, has
makes my breast throb! How many times I would have left it all for
regain possession, if the ascendancy of an invincible feeling
hadn't held me back!


- Since a long time? - said Antonia.


"Since I saw you," replied Lothario coldly; - and if
my heart, less reckless in its feelings, had become attached to
some isolated woman like me in the midst of the world, who could have
understand and envy the happiness of my groves! - It was the dream
of the youth!


- It seems to me, Lothario, - said Madame Alberti, - that you are creating
chimeras to fight them. I have not examined, I have
not even undertaken to delve deeper into the strange secret that makes you
give up so early on all the advantages that your happy
qualities gave you cause for hope in the world; but my
existence is unconditionally linked to the existence of my sister, and I
already know that she is ready to submit to wild whims
of your philosophy, until you like to come back to a
kind of life more worthy of her and you. She alone has the right
to disown myself.


- Let's go to the Clementine mountains, - said Antonia, throwing herself
in his sister's arms.


- To the Clementine mountains! - exclaimed Lothario, - Antonia y
would have come! - she would have followed me there, and the deprivation of such
happiness would not suffice for my eternal punishment! "


The door opened to ordinary visitors.


A weight of ice fell on Antonia's heart. Lothario approached
from her gently; and covering his transports with an appearance
cold and polished:


“To the Clementine mountains! - he repeated in a low voice. - Antonia
would have come? "


Antonia searched for her sister's eyes.


“Everywhere, - she said, pointing to her, - everywhere with her, and
with Lothario.


- Let me dream, - he resumed, - of the happiness that is reserved for me
or the one I lost. I'm not calm enough to see
distinctly my future. - Tomorrow ... or never! "


Lothario had gone out in the greatest confusion; the heart of Antonia
was not quieter. His worry had become a
awful perplexity. Two hours later, Matteo entered, and presented
a letter to Antonia, who gave it to Madame Alberti. They were
alone. This post was written in these terms:


“Never, Antonia, never! Don't accuse me; forget me ... after
to have cried for a while. I renounce everything, the only happiness that
my miserable heart has never understood. I'm going to seek death
who spared me for too long. O my Antonia! if this world to which
you believe may one day open to the voice of repentance; if, among
the children of God, there are none who are disinherited
in advance, I will see you again. - See you again! Alas! never, Antonia,
never! "

LOTHARIO.


Madame Alberti had read these lines in a trembling voice, and without
dare to look up at his sister. When she looked at Antonia, she
was frightened by his pallor and his stillness. A terrible blow
had just been brought to this weak heart, and Madame Alberti conceived that
this blow was irreparable.


The departure of Lothario was known the same day in Venice; and,
according to custom, he gave rise to a host of conjectures
various, each stranger than the next. When Antonia
was able to think about it, she saw only a terrible enigma,
whose word she couldn't look up without feeling her heart
to faint and his reason to go astray. Only once did she believe a
moment to be able to grasp its mystery. Since the day Lothario
had said her last farewell to Antonia, tomorrow or never, we had
avoided letting her enter this apartment, which
recalled that cruel thoughts and mortal regrets. As
she had managed to get in without witnesses, and that she
looked thoughtfully at the place where he had left it, she saw,
at the foot of the seat on which she was sitting, small
shelves of Russian leather, garnished with a steel clip whose
spring was broken. She seizes it; and thinking that they
could contain the explanation she needed, that
maybe even Lothario had not abandoned them without purpose
in this place, they eagerly opened them, and walked there
quickly his looks. They only contained a dozen
scattered pages, drawn sometimes with a pencil, sometimes with a
feather, depending on the circumstances in which the ideas presented themselves
to Lothario's imagination.


Two or three of those lines were written in blood.


They offered little connection between them; but almost all
were inspired by this fatal spirit of paradox, by this
wild and exalted misanthropy which dominated in his speeches.


Too concerned with the feelings that filled her heart to
to become attached to their meaning, and to see in them something other than what they
offered more remarkable, singular images,
dreamy thoughts, streaks of dark energy, but nothing
who could dispel her doubts or fix them, Antonia closed the
tablets of Lothario, and hid them in his bosom, without
communicate to Mrs. Alberti.




XIII


Let's not try to unravel why the innocent moaned, while
that the crime is clothed with the robe of honor. The day of
vengeance, the day of eternal retribution alone can we
reveal the secret of the judge and the victim.

HERVEY.


LOTHARIO TABLETS


"Mount Taurus raised its forehead above all the hills
; one of them said to him: I am only a hill, but I contain
a volcano. "


"THE SOCIETY, that is to say a handful of patricians,
publicans and omens, and on the other side, the whole human race
whole in his swaddling clothes and in his edges ..... "


“The legislators of the eighteenth century resemble the architects of
Lycerus, who carried the materials of a palace into the air,
and who did not deal with the foundations. "


“Worn out peoples ask to be ruled. The peoples
depraved need to be submissive. Freedom is food
generous which is only suitable for a healthy and robust adolescence. "


"When politics has become a science of words, everything is
lost. There is something more vile in the world than the slave
of a tyrant: it is the dupe of a sophist. "


"It is inconceivable that men cut their throats for their rights,
and that these so-called human rights are just words
mystics interpreted by lawyers. Why don't we talk
never to man the first of human rights, his right to
a share of land determined in the proportion of the individual
territory? "


"What is this law which bears the emblems and the name of
equality on its frontispiece? Is it agrarian law? - No it's
the contract for the sale of a nation delivered to the rich by
schemers and factionists who want to get rich. "


“A man flatters the people. He promises to serve him. It is
came to power. It is believed that he will ask for the sharing of
goods. It's not that. He acquires goods, and he associates
with the tyrants for the sharing of the people. "


“The sacred word of the Hebrews is gold. There is a way to
utter in the ear of the judges of the earth which brings down your
stiff enemy dead. "


"Lycurgus thought a strange thing: it is that the theft was
the only institution that could maintain social balance. "


"Are you not tired, young man, of reaping the gardens of
Tantalum? Open your eyes to the evils of humanity; looked. The
Curtius gulf is still open and it takes a lot
rush for the salvation of the world. "


“The alms are a partial restitution, made amicably. The
beggar compromises; let's plead. "


“Pull a man out of the woods, and show him the company; he
will soon be corrupt and contemptible like you, but he will
will never understand the impassive Areopagus who coldly sends a
beggar at the gallows for decimating the banquet of a
millionaire. "


"It is a difficult question to decide what
is more hideous in the social life of the offense or the law, this
that there is more cruel of the guilty or the judge, the crime or the
punishment. Opinions are very divided. "


“Killing a man in the height of a passion is understandable.
"Have him killed by another in a public place, in peace
of serious meditation and under the pretext of a ministry
honorable, this is not understandable. "


“A scary thing to think about is that equality, which is
the object of all our wishes and all our revelations,
actually finds that in two states of man, slavery and
the death. "


"To see people struggle around an idea like
ants for a bit of straw, there is enough to die of
confusion. A bit of straw, at least that's something, and a
idea, it's nothing. "


"The theft of the poor from the rich, if we go back to the origin of
things, would, in the final analysis, only be a repair,
that is to say the correct and reciprocal displacement of a piece of
money or a piece of bread that turns over from the thief's hands
in the hands of the stolen. "


"The highest reach of freedom that a
nation which is aware of its sovereignty, it is the right to choose
slavery to his liking. "


“There is a great obstacle to the liberation of cities: this
are the cities.


"Show me a town, a beehive or an anthill, and I will
show slavery; only the lion and the eagle are kings, because
that they are lonely. "


“Wickedness is a social disease. The natural man is not
more evil than another brute. Civilized man creates horror
or pity. Count the floors of a house, and remember the
parable of Babel. "


"If I had the social pact at my disposal, I wouldn't change it
nothing; I would tear it up. "


"The fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil is the
society. The first time man wrapped himself in a
girdle of foliage, he took on slavery and death. "


There are two very opposite instincts in the simple man: the instinct
of conservation for him and for that which proceeds from him;
the instinct of destruction for all that is taught to him and
ordered. The company is therefore false. "


"All the works of God are accomplished in their destination
and in their end. If the company had entered for the purpose of
creation, the lark would never lead its young in a field
of wheat ripe and ready for harvest. "


"There are few men whose hearts do not quiver with indignation and
of pain at the sight of a proud lion tied up in a cage of
iron, and humbly licking the bloody hand of the butcher who
nourishes. What must the man who looks at the man think? "


"To make political inequality less outrageous, almost
all the people who have not made it rest on benefits
moralities have at least linked the origin to generous memories
or sacred traditions. It has not yet been found
legislation depraved enough to confess in its institutions
the aristocracy of money. When we get there, the weather will be fine
live, because everything will end. "


"It is very humiliating for the species that the slaves are not
in the minority nowhere in a human society. What does it take
to change a bad place for a good one, when we have the
strength and number? "


"Nothing is easier than to persuade a man that he depends on
man, by virtue of a mysterious right, founded on a title
unknown. But how to make him understand, what is true, that
its dependence results purely and simply from the inequality of a
old division of the land, which has neither changed shape nor extent, and
who can be challenged every day? "


"The bee's hive does not belong to the hornet, but the
field flowers belong to all air insects. The
the only inviolable property of the individual is his industry. "


"Is it true that most of the sovereigns of Europe are
to register the land? Is. "

“Establishing monarchies today is a great pity. "
I was not surprised to find the cell of a half hermit
hidden in the ash of the crater; but that a king thinks of building his
throne at the bottom, I do not recommend it! "


"To bend the bow of Nimrod for the last time is not
rare wonder, Napoleon! ten others have done it before you. -
Pass again to break it. "


“Our Venice fireworks end with a spray of fire which
would eclipse the sun in its midday.


"The night is only deeper after that, the night that
belongs to thieves.


"The day after a GREAT NATION is the night of a fire
fireworks. "


"If you were successful in your projects, - they say, - it would be
to start again tomorrow. "


"The great evil to start again tomorrow!" we are so good
today! "


"When we have ceased to live first in the heart of another, we
is very really dead. All that's missing is the way. "


"A society which kills a man is quite convinced that it is
justice. - Immense and sublime retributive justice than that of a
man who would kill society! "


"Two crimes for which I have no mercy: hurting whom
can not defend himself, and steal who needs.

"Tortures and curses on the infamous who stole the dog
of a blind man! "


"The savage of the South Sea who gives a woman for an ax
does not make a bad deal. What is the country where we would not have
not a woman with an ax? "


"There are at the bottom of man three errors or three mysteries which
decide to live: God, love and freedom. - And there is soon
two thousand years that the company would no longer exist, if a few
beggars in Galilee did not dare to make a religion
with that.

"How many speculators do you know who would invest in the
probable duration of this last institution of the political world a
sequin life annuity? "


"I would like to be shown in history a monarchy
which was not founded by a thief. "


"When the nations reach their last period, there is no longer
between them a rallying cry: EVERYTHING IS TO ALL. "

"And the day when the standard which will carry this motto will be wet
from the crying of a child, I will tear it out to make myself one
shroud. "


“The history of ancient peoples is not difficult to tell;
the history of the peoples to come is not difficult to predict. -
The fathers, the old men, the wise men, the priests, the soldiers,
the Kings. - And then after ... the peoples perhaps? ... "


"There are only three ways to link your memory to that of the temple
of Delphi. You have to build it, consecrate it, or set it on fire. "


"Give me a force that dares to take the name of law, and I will
will show a flight that will take the property name. "


"Freedom is not such a rare treasure: it is in the hand of
all the strong, and in the purse of all the rich. "


“You are master of my money, and I am master of your life. This
belongs to us, neither to you nor to me. Give back, and I leave. "


“A thousand fortunes for a thought! a thousand thoughts for a feeling
! a thousand feelings for an action! a thousand sublime actions for one
hair ! - and the world, and the future, and eternity with it all!
"


“The founder of a new sect, poor man! the illuminator
of old morality, poor man! a legislator, poor man!
- A conqueror! what misery! "


"If there is a good society in the world, it is one where we share
while giving a premium to the strongest. - When cunning and
betrayal get involved, legislation comes along. "


“I only know of one profession to be discredited, that of God. "


“I have sometimes been asked if I like children. I believe him
good. They are not yet men. "


"All the voices of the earth once announced that the great
Pan was dead. It was the emancipation of slaves. When you
hear a second time, it will be the emancipation of the poor -
and then the usurpation of the world will begin again. "


"Of all governments, the one that least revolts my heart,
the one that degrades humanity the least is the despotism of
the East, where the degradation of peoples is at least explained by
superstitions. I conceive of a tyrant who descends from the prophets
and who is an ally of the stars. In Tibet, he is invisible, immortal,
sacred. This is good, it should never be indifferent.
Tyranny and slavery are two states which involve two
cash. The most degraded of men are the slaves who
recognize tyrants made in their image. "


"We have many graces to give to our star, when we can
to leave men without being obliged to hurt them and
declare their enemy. "


"What is the difference between a crime and an action
heroic, between torture and apotheosis? The place, the time,
the contemptible opinion of a stupid crowd who do not know the
real name of things, and which randomly applies those that
usage has taught him. "


"The plagues are in the order of nature, and the laws are not there
not. "


“It was an idea less appropriate to the Divinity, as I
conceive, but which had something consoling for the man
than to give infirmities to the gods. I like that Apollo is
banished, that Ceres suffers from hunger in Stellion's mother, that
Venus be wounded by Diomedes, may the cradle of Hercules be
surrounded by serpents like that of genius, and that he himself dies
devoured by this robe of Nessus which he bequeathed to these successors. "


"If my heart could give itself faith ... if I had a god to
to invent, I wish he were born on the straw of a stable,
that he had escaped from the assassins only in the arms of a poor man
craftsman who would have passed for his father; that his childhood would have been
spent in misery and exile; he would have been proscribing
all his life, despised by the great, unknown to kings, persecuted by
priests, disowned by his friends, sold by one of his disciples,
abandoned by the most upright of his judges, devoted to the torment of
preferably the last of the scoundrels, whipped with rods, crowned
thorns, outraged by the executioners, and that he would have perished between two
thieves, one of whom followed him into the sky. "


“Almighty God, have mercy on me!




XIV


It is I who lead to the living room of moans, it is I who
lead in eternal pain, it's soft that lead in the middle
of the condemned people of the rebels. Leave all hope, you who
Come in.

DANTE.


Since Lothario left, Antonia's melancholy had made
rapid progress. She had fallen into a depression of so much
scarier than she seemed to ignore or have
forgot the cause. His sadness was not determined; it was
a vague uneasiness from which she was dragged with lively distraction,
but where she was returning faster than she had left. He him
often smiled, and sometimes even without a motive; so
his gaiety was painful to see, because the expression of his
physiognomy did not seem to agree well with the state of his
heart. Never had she looked more carefully for walks
lonely. Almost all the places she frequented him
Lothario remembered, but she never named him. She avoided
the conversations in which his memory could mingle; we would have thought
that she was trying to convince herself that he did not exist for
her, and that in her life he was only the illusion of a dream or
of a fit of delirium. On the contrary, she often took care of her
father and mother, whom she had not named for a long time,
and she spoke of it, against its usage, without shedding tears,
as if it had only been separated by a short space of
way, and that she would soon have to join them.


Madame Alberti regarded this circumstance as something
happy in Antonia's situation. She thought her
memories would be destroyed more easily by each other,
and that it would be easier for him to forget the annoyances of a
feeling which she was still far from knowing all the
power, near the tomb of his parents. She therefore resolved to
drive Antonia back to Trieste, and Antonia received this proposal
with a testimony of cold satisfaction, the only one that his features
gloomy and his fixed eyes could imperfectly manifest. At
remains, Madame Alberti had not given up on her own
hope. She was quite convinced, on the contrary, and there
had indeed nothing more probable than the strange process of
Lothario was just another effect of the oddity of his
character or embarrassment of his position, and that he would not delay
not to come back to Antonia's feet to claim the rights that she
had given to a happiness that seemed to pass all its
expectations.


It was possible that the reasons which made this necessary
singular system in which he enveloped his actions prevented him
then to form a knot which, by completely fixing its existence,
would subject him too closely and by too many points to curiosity
men, and would remove him from this wave of conjectures which
the uncertainty was doubtless not useless to him.


In the state of Europe, how many eminent men were forced,
like Lothario in hiding their name across twenty different countries,
and to escape like him from the deepest affections,
sweetest duties of nature, to keep their safety,
and above all so as not to compromise that of the people who
were expensive!


This was evidently Lothario's situation, and it was necessary
although it would change one day. It would have been absurd to seek to
his conduct another explanation. One could even think that if he
had feared, with just cause, to prolong his stay too much
in a big capital where he was already very well known, he
would not fail to move towards Trieste, when he had
learned that Antonia was back there.


These assumptions were very likely, and Antonia did not
did not repel them; only she did not answer, and
looked at his sister defiantly when it was mentioned;
then she threw herself into his arms.


The cases that had called them to Venice not holding them back
more, they left on a boat that was going to Trieste
by the lagoons. This way of traveling had seemed to them
preferable to any other, because it made them avoid
roads infested by Jean Sbogar's troop, and especially the
dangerous passage where they had almost become his
prisoners.


The lagoon channels offer little interest to the traveler. Tracks
by nature between deserted and arid portions of land that
the sea invades and abandons in turn, and which cannot offer
asylum that the wandering flocks of shorebirds, nothing
varies, nothing animates their sad monotony. They do not present
everywhere to the gaze that sterile strikes or forests of
reeds, from which sometimes rises with a long cry the heron
surprised in his sleep by the noise of the sailors and
passengers.


Antonia, thoughtful, had not yet been distracted by any
a circumstance worthy of occupying it, when night fell and came
lend all objects a calmer and gentler character. The
the sky was strewn with bright stars, but the moon refused him
its light. Nothing could be seen outside the boat, and the
The alternating swaying of the rowers was barely visible there.
We could only hear the rhythmic fall of their oars and the
hiss of water divided by the bow. Suddenly man
at the helm broke the silence of nature singing,
in a voice that was not without pleasure, a few stanzas from
Cup where are painted in harmonious verse the delights of
solitude between two lovers equally in love. Its accents, that nothing
reflected in the vastness of the air and the sky, and which
stretched unhindered over the smooth surface of the sea,
made the soul participate in the enjoyment of this infinity in
which they were going to die. Antonia listened to them with a feeling
whose gentleness astonished her, and that a moment before she would have
not believed to be able to taste yet. She did not know what to attribute the
confidence which filled his heart, and which calmed all
thunderstorms. It was not the vivid and tumultuous illusion of
first hopes, it was the rested enjoyment of a future
pure. It seemed to him that these guardian intelligences who watch
on the last moments of innocence, and which come to him
to open the abode of eternal rest, were to thus manifest
their presence.


Madame Alberti felt the same emotion. His hand had united with
that of Antonia, they had leaned against each other, and
their hearts beat with a steady and gentle movement. Dives
in a languor that the extreme stillness of the air and
the almost insensible ripple of the waters contributed to
maintain, they fell asleep kissing.


There was little time that their rest lasted when a blow of
rifle, fired at a short distance, disturbed Antonia's sleep.
Madame Alberti was still leaning against her, but she did not
did not speak. Antonia thought at first that she had dreamed; But
the stillness of the boat, the silence of the oars, and a few words
strange she heard in the confused interview of the sailors
terrified, undeceived it. She tried to wake her sister up without
be able to achieve it. She wanted to get up, and felt herself seize the
arm by a cold, nervous hand.


 "She's still a woman, - said a voice: - Jean will not be
 happy. "


At these words, her hair stood on end on her forehead, a sweat
cold flooded her limbs, and she passed out. She does not
came to her only to the sound of the wheels of a car driving her
drove, and under which trembled, muttering dully,
the resounding boards of a drawbridge.


She was alone.


Antonia, returned from that first fit of astonishment which gave
unexpected misfortunes the appearance of a dream, was not long in
understand this one. There was no doubt that they were
bandits stationed on the seashore who had arrested the
boat, and these bandits could only belong to the troop of
Jean Sbogar. Got out of the car, and supported by two men
whose bizarre clothing and fierce physiognomy filled her
of dread whenever the lights scattered under the vaults
came to enlighten them, she walked through the vast galleries,
immense staircases, the Gothic rooms of the castle,
confirming more and more in the horrible idea that she was
prisoner in Duino.


Arrived at a room which seemed to be intended for him, and where his
awful escort left her free for a moment, she rushed towards a
open window, and saw in front of it only the sea.
distant, which seemed to him to be that of the lighthouse of Aquileia, shone
alone in the midst of the night stars. She no longer doubted her
went out, and fell in pain in a chair.


“To Duino! - she cried: - Jean Sbogar! ... But what have we done
of my sister? "


The sonorous vaults alone answered his cries.


The last word she had spoken expired in their
depths, like a weak voice that dies out. Antonia stood up
terrified, repeating: "My sister! ..." in the tone of a person
afflicted with a painful dream, and trying to wake up.


The illusion of the echo was renewed even more sinister. She
sounded like the last moan of a violent death. The
unhappy Antonia, almost unable to support herself, leaned
against one of the large pilasters of the front door, under a
lamppost which shed all its light on her. She kissed in
trembling the cold column, stuck his half-covered face to it
of his flowing hair, and felt himself sag under the weight of his
terror. A few men grouped in the corridor appeared
look from afar; but the weakness of his eyesight left him
distinguish, in the shadows where they were hidden, that the movement
of their plumes, and she was not sure that she
deceive himself, when a terrible cry hit his ear.


One of these men had fled by naming her.


The night was very late, when Antonia gave in for the second
times to these cruel emotions. It wasn't until many hours later
that she could be returned entirely to herself. She was surprised,
looking around her, of the delicacy of the care with which she
was the object. We had taken her to a more
convenient and more ornate. There were no women in the castle,
but it was served by children of agreeable faces.


Only one of the brigands asked for permission towards the end of the day.
to be introduced to it to carry out the orders
his captain had charged him. He was a very young man, whose
sad face, but gentle and modest, would have inspired in
any other place trust and interest. He came to learn how to
Antonia that her boat had only been attacked by the
more fatal; that nothing she owned would be
removed; that she herself was free in Duino, that she did not have
ceased to be; that everything was ready for his trip, and that he
it was up to her alone to hasten or delay it, depending on whether
his health would demand it; that in the meantime, finally, she could
to rule as sovereign over all who lived in the castle.


“But my sister! - cried Antonia.


- Your sister, madame, - replied the young man, lowering his
eyes, - cannot be returned to you. It is the only reserve that we
let us be obliged to put to our obedience, and this condition
even is not imposed by a force that depends on us.


- And who could impose it? - replied Antonia quickly. - Who
would prevent me from reuniting with my sister, who was arrested,
kidnapped, driven here with me? Ah! I don't want any of the
benefits, none of the repairs you offer me, if I don't
sharing with her.


- Madame, - said the young man, bowing, - I have not received
other instructions. "


And he withdrew without waiting for further entreaties.


The name of Madame Alberti still wandered on Antonia's lips
prohibited; he was not heard.


The perplexity in which she remained immersed is easier to
understand that to describe. She was beginning to hope that this
event would not have the dreadful consequences that it had caused
to fear; but she did not guess the motives that one could have
to keep her away from her sister, and this new mystery was a
abyss where his mind wandered. Everything persuaded him besides
that she had not been deceived by false promises. The sun
had been lying for several hours, and its doors remained
open. The people employed to serve her had withdrawn
themselves to give him complete freedom, indicating to him
the part of his apartment they were going to occupy and where they
awaited his orders. Finally he did not appear to be a soldier in
the vast expanse of corridors that had been lit as for him
to offer a passage, at some point she took the resolution to
go out.


Reassured by everything she noticed, she did not hesitate to
enter the gallery leading to his bedroom and follow
its detours to the grand staircase of the castle. She went down
without obstacles, walked with equal ease through the vestibule and
the courtyards, and reached the drawbridge without meeting anyone. he
stooped at his approach, as if some magical power had
interpreted Antonia's wish, and hastened to obey it. AT
no sooner had she left it behind than she saw a car
travel bag ready to go, and guarded by servants. She believed
even admit that she was loaded with luggage that had been
taken with her on the boat, and the postilion's eagerness to
her approach gave her reason to believe that she was expected.
She inquired, however, of the destination of this car.


"Apparently for Trieste," replied one of the servants; -But
for such place as the Signora Antonia de Monteleone pleases.


- It's me, - replied Antonia.


- We did not doubt it, - said the postilion; - There's no
other women in this castle, and we are ready for you
to obey.


- There is another woman in this castle, - cried Antonia ... -
My sister is in this castle ... Have you not been warned that I
would be accompanied by my sister?


- We only talked about the signora, - he said, shaking sadly.
the head, - and there is no appearance that his sister can come out
of the castle, if this is not the intention of the owner. But
Madame may not know the owner of the château de
Duino. Captive for such a short time ...


- Forgive me, - replied Antonia, - I know where I am. It is
however incomprehensible that my sister is not here. "


The drawbridge was still lowered. The castle was only guarded
by the lookouts of its towers. Antonia cast her eyes in
inside, and thought her sister was trapped there.


"I will stay, - she said in a loud voice, - I will not leave
without her, and her destiny will be mine. "


As she spoke these words, she had quickly gone through a
part of the space that separated it from the grand staircase. She is
returned to see if she was being followed. The drawbridge is
raised. In this aspect his courage weakens; it seemed to him that everything
was ending, and that she had just raised between herself and the world a
barrier that she would not cross. She would have liked to see herself
suddenly transported in the middle of a wild forest, at the mercy
the fiercest animals, during one of the harshest nights
of winter, but still free and mistress of itself; the walls
of the castle weighed on her, on the air she breathed, and her
compressed heart was about to burst in her bosom. She approached
of the balustrade to lean and to catch breath. His
eyes were turned towards a window from which a weak
light that came to tremble at his feet. After a few
moments of vague and involuntary attention, she thought she seized
singular noises which also came from the underground passages of the castle,
and which reminded his mind of the solemnity of certain songs
religious. At first she judged that it must have been the bellow of
the sea breaking at the foot of the mountain; but these noises
only arrived at her at intervals, sometimes they even
seemed quite stopped, and Antonia was approaching
measured from the window with uneasy curiosity. They
finally struck more directly, to the point where she imagined
discern articulate sounds and the very name of his sister. Convinced
that the preoccupation of his mind might have produced this
illusion, she knelt on the edge of the window; and holding back
his breathing so as not to lose the slightest noise that stirred
the air, she heard it again.


"My sister is here," she said aloud, unable to moderate the
feeling which absorbed all his ideas, which penetrated all his
sense of an inconceivable mixture of joy and terror.


She got up hastily, and rushed down an evil ramp
illuminated which was to lead it to the underground passages of the castle. After
countless detours indicated from space to space by
pale lamps hidden in the hollows of the wall, it slows down
her walk, because the noise that had attracted her was
close so as not to let her lose a word, but she
heard Madame Alberti's name no longer. It was only, like
she had assumed it, a song like church songs,
which was sung by a single voice and repeated in chorus. Soon,
she arrived at the very place of the ceremony; and, frozen with fear,
she slipped like a specter between the tall columns which
supported the vault at a prodigious height, hidden in the
shadows cast in the distance by their enormous bases. All of these
columns loaded with bundles of spears, scimitars and weapons
fire, formed a kind of forest through which one cannot
could only vaguely distinguish what was happening in the center of
this underground room.


Antonia, elated by her attachment to her sister, armed herself with
more and more of a resolution hitherto foreign to its
character. Whenever the united voices filled the
echoes of a prolonged noise that could cover the sound of his footsteps,
she flew from one column to another, and waited, to dare
to turn his eyes on the enclosure, that the universal silence which there
succeeded from time to time, and that its appearance would undoubtedly
troubled, proved to him that she had not been seen.


However, the delicacy of his sight did not allow him to
distinguish objects as if they had been intercepted by
a cloud, and the vagueness that his imagination gave to their shapes
uncertainly increased the terror of this nocturnal scene.


On the side opposite to the entrance to the underground, rose a long
series of angular arches whose points were lost in
the darkness of the vault, and which were only separated from each other
by other groups of thin columns, blackened and worn by the
time. Mourning hangings cut these arcades at a certain
elevation, and the brigands scattered over the bottom of this
funeral decoration added to its mysterious horror; each,
motionless and collected, seated at the back of the stalls dug in
the massive columns, and that we would have taken for figures
sinister arranged by an atrabilar sculptor, these, standing
around the iron candelabra, and fanning with their daggers the
flame of torches and braziers; those who got lost in
the night of the distant porticoes, and which, through the darkness
mobiles from which darkened and emerged in turn their
frowning heads and bushy beards, looked like
so many ghosts. Among them, there was one especially whose
singular attitude excited the attention all the more
Antonia, whom she soon judged to be unhappy and
sensitive. His face was wrapped in a crepe that hid it
entirely. Kneeling on the first steps of a platform
the rest of which hid from the sight of Antonia, he was leaning on
the hilt of his saber and wept bitterly. The sound of his
sobs alone interrupted the firm and sustained voice of the priest who
presided over the sacrifice. Antonia, beside herself and pressed by
invincible curiosity, made a movement to see the altar.
It was a funeral bed, and on this bed a woman lying, her head
raised on a black velvet cushion, and hardly disfigured by
recent traces of death.


" My sister! Antonia cried, and she fell.


It was she indeed, because the shot fired at the boat
had killed her, and Jean Sbogar's troop returned the last
honors.




XV

Why do you bristle like this, looking at me, your hair
bloody? Why do you turn on me those eyes whose apple
dried out has disappeared from its orbit? It wasn't me who killed you.

SHAKESPEARE.


Will I find you everywhere, shadows of the murdered, with your
large livid wounds? and you, weeping mothers, who show me these
flames lit by my hands, these flames whose tongues
horrible devour the cradle of your firstborns?

SCHILLER.


Antonia remained for a long time buried in a state which resembled
sleep. She did not seem to experience any agitation, and this calm
was so deep, it had to make room to all appearances
so deadly anguish that one trembled to see it cease.
However, she came to herself without showing any pain. All at
more, she seemed occupied with an unfortunate idea, a memory
unwelcome, whom she was trying to drive away. She looked around
around her uncertainly, and ran her hand over her forehead
to seek to realize a worrying doubt.

“I know very well, - she said at last, - I know where she is. I have it
will meet again this evening. "


Fitzer, the youngest of the brigands, approached her to
inquire about his condition. She smiles at him like a person
known, because it was he who had spoken to her the day before
from Jean Sbogar.


"I've been waiting for you for a long time," she continued. - I would like
know for what torture you punish the indiscreet who penetrate
in your parties without having been asked. I know a young
girl ... But I recommend you this secret on the salvation of what
you like the best in the world ... promise me not to mention it
never to anyone. "


The young man looked at her, his eyes wet with tears, because
that he saw that his reason was lost.


"Wait," she said to him in a tone of the greatest surprise,
are tears! I thought we weren't crying anymore. Don't hide from me
not your tears. As for me, I cannot show any more. I myself
remember seeing another man, it was in a place where I
was not expected, a man who was also crying. I think this
could be you, for her face was covered with a veil that
kept me from knowing him.


- His features are unknown to me as well as to you, - replied Fitzer. -
Few of us have seen it other than through this veil or
the visor of his helmet. Our old warriors alone saw him at
discovered in the fighting; but he very rarely comes to Duino,
and only seems masked since we walked safely
the Venetian provinces. He's our captain.


- Where is he? - replied Antonia coldly. - So he doesn't know
that I am here?


- He knows it, but he does not dare to come before you, for fear
that his presence does not alarm you, and that you do not attribute to him
the error that caught you captive.


- Captive? you say. Antonia is freer than air! Tonight
again, I walked very far from here in the thickets
delicious, where I breathed such pure air! I've never seen so much
flowers! My sister was there with me; she wanted to stay there. I there
went more often when I was younger; but I'm not there
never been with my mom. My life has changed a lot since that
time. "


Antonia rested her head on her hand, and her eyelids
lowered themselves. Her complexion was animated with dark colors, her
lips seemed parched with a burning fever. She laughed
and sobbed.


Antonia's fate was fulfilled. He no longer had left on the
land other protection than that of this formidable lover who
had so mysteriously appeared at the Farnedo, and who was Jean
Sbogar himself. The love of Jean Sbogar watched over her with a
solicitude and with a purity that would no doubt have surprised her, if
the disorder of his reason had allowed him to reflect on his
state. They brought in, from the cottages of Sestiana, young women
to serve it and to keep it; famous doctors were
called or kidnapped from neighboring towns to provide care
that his illness required. A clergyman, for a long time
prisoner of the brigands, the one who had just celebrated the service
funeral of Madame Alberti, in an underground passage they had
converted into a chapel for this ceremony, spied on his
reads with pain the lucid moments that his illness left him, to
bring him the consolations of heaven. These fierce men at last,
whose soul until then had conceived only thoughts of blood,
purified by the aspect of so much innocence and touched by so much
of misfortune, lavished on him the marks of submission the most
delicate and tender. Antonia got used to seeing them and
to entertain them with the bizarre illusions which succeeded each other in
his sick imagination. Jean Sbogar, alone, did not dare to
present to her under the veil or visor helmet which
hid her features, that when she was delivered to sleep, or
that delirium deprived him of knowledge of all objects, and
that he could feed his eyes with painful contemplation
loved object, without risking inspiring it with fear or
the horror. One day however, prostrate at his feet and unable
to contain the feelings that oppressed him:


“Antonia! - he cried in a voice choked by sobs, -
Antonia! dear Antonia! "


She turned to her side, and looked at him gently. he
hastened to walk away. She called him back with a sign. He remained,
head bent over his chest, in the attitude of obedience
and attention.


“Antonia! - she said after a moment of silence, - I think
it is indeed my name, I wore it in the house where I am
born, and then I was promised to be happy. Listen, -
she continued, taking the thief's hand, - I want to make you
a confidence. From the time of my early youth, when I believed
that it was so easy and so sweet to live, when my blood was not burning
not my veins, when my tears did not burn my cheeks, when
I did not see spirits running through thickets, who
open the earth by striking it with their feet, which dig
abysses deeper than the sea, and which cause
sources of fire; when the souls of assassins who have not
asylum in the tomb did not yet come around me
leap and rush with cruel laughter, and when I wake up I
didn't have to untie the viper entwined in my hair,
the viper whose foaming head with a bluish poison rested on
my neck ... at that time there was an angel traveling on
the earth with features that would have moved the heart of a parricide;
but I only saw it, because God took it out when his
felicity was jealous of mine, and I called him "Lothario,
my Lothario ... ”I remember that we had a palace in
distant mountains. I never could find the one
path. "


Although the brigand had not taken off his veil, Antonia noticed
that her tears had redoubled at these last words. Her him
then smiles with tender pity; and taking back her hand that she
had let slip and who had not dared to retain his:


"I know, - she said, - that I am hurting you, and I
beg your pardon. I'm not unaware that you love me and that I am
your fiancee, the fiancee of Jean Sbogar. You see i know you
and that I speak right today. It has been a long time since our
marriage is arranged, but I did not want to have any secrets
you. Besides, this Lothario might not exist. I saw
for a few days so many people who exist only in
my imagination and which escape me when I come to myself! ...
am sure, for example, that you did not know me a sister? No, -
she continued after thinking for a moment. - If I had a
sister, she would act as my mother, and we could not
to pass from it to the celebration of our nuptials. Tell me if you do
for that day, brilliant preparations? It is necessary, because the
bride is a rich heiress. I have gold staples and
diamond rings to adorn me; but I don't want in my
hair than a simple rosehip garland. "


She paused again. His bewilderment redoubled. A
the awful smile to see stopped on his mouth.


“It will be a beautiful party! - she continued; - all hell there
will be. The torch of Jean Sbogar's wedding must make the
sun in its midday. Do you see the guests from here? You know them
all. I didn't invite anyone. Here are some who have half limbs
charred by fire; old people, children whose scraps
wake up alive from the fires you started, to
take part in your pleasures ... Here are others who are rising
in their shrouds, and which slip to the feast table in
hiding bloody wounds. O my God, what monsters have killed
this young woman? Poor Lucile! And what name are they me
greet ..... Did you hear them correctly? ... HELLO, HELLO ... I
never dare to repeat it! HELLO, they say; and they whisper
all together the rallying word of the cursed, the cry of joy that
Satan would have pushed if he had defeated his creator, the word
secret uttered by an execrable mother who is going to slaughter her child,
to make himself deaf to his moans. - HELLO TO THE BRIDE of
JEAN SBOGAR ..... "


As she finished these words, Antonia lost consciousness. This crisis was
long and terrible: for a long time people even despaired of their lives. during
eight days, the leader of the thieves, motionless at the foot of the bed
which she was lying down, attentive to all her movements,
had taken care of no other care than to serve her. He was watching and
was crying.


When Antonia's condition improved, certain that she was
familiar with his appearance, and that she saw him without fear, he
was still awake.

This assiduity struck her.

The reminiscences she had of the past were too confused
so that the name of this man and the memories that were there
tied up inspired him with a continuous feeling of horror. Time
in time only, his soul revolted against the idea of ​​depending
of him, and his very approach froze her with terror; but more
usually abandoned like a child, by the absence of her
reason, at the sole instinct of her needs, she no longer saw, in
the captain of the Duino bandits, a sentient creature and
compassionate person who tried to soften the bitterness of her
sufferings, and who eagerly warned his least
needs. So she spoke soft words to him and
flattering, which seemed to redouble the secret pain with which he
was devoured.


One day, among others, he was sitting next to her, veiled next
its use, and careful to protect its sleep against all
accidents that could disturb him. She woke up however
suddenly with a sharp movement, pronouncing the name of
Lothario.


“I saw him, - she said with a deep sigh, - he was
sit in your place. I often see it there in my sleep, and I
find very happy; but how come i believe the y
also sometimes when I am awake, and when he
seem like I'm not dreaming? It is there, under this curtain, that he has
wont to come. - In these days of pain ..... and hope,
where I felt called to eternal freedom, a stream of
flames ran through all my limbs, my mouth was fiery, my
blue and bruised nails. - Everything here was full of ghosts. -
We saw bright green aspics, like those
hide in the trunk of willows; other reptiles much more
hideous, who have a human face; disproportionate giants and without
shapes; newly fallen heads, whose eyes full of
life penetrated me with a frightful look; and you, you were too
standing in the midst of them, like the magician who presided over all these
enchantments of death ... I cried out in terror, and I called
Lothario to protect me ... Suddenly - don't laugh at my
chimera! - I saw this veil fall, and, in the place where you were
placed, I saw Lothario all in tears, stretching towards me
his arms trembling, and who called me in a moaning voice .....
It is true that it was not him as I knew him,
sad, anxious and severe, but beautiful with a celestial kindness! Fact,
livid, frightened, his bloody eyes turned; his beard was
thick and hideous; a desperate laughter, like that of demons,
wandered over his pale lips ... Oh! you would never design this
what has become of Lothario! ... "


The thief did not appear to have heard Antonia. He was immersed
in deep silence. He got up and walked into the bedroom
not rushed, then he came back to Antonia and looked at her
long time. His teeth clashed violently. Meditation
horrible seemed to occupy him entirely to the point of not even
let him discern the ever-increasing dread he inspired
to his unfortunate prisoner.


Finally she got up on her bed, managed to support herself on her
knees, and cried to him, hands crossed in prayer:

“Grace, grace, forgive me! do not fear Lothario; he ... not
does not want Antonia. I gave myself to him, and he refused me. -
Thanks again for this once, and I'll never tell you about it! "


Then she fell back, for her strength was exhausted. Jean Sbogar
flew to his feet, grabbed the end of the blanket that
enveloped it and which floated to the ground, imprinted its mouth there
with fury, and fled.




XVI


Strength of the warrior, what are you? Today you ride the
battle before you in clouds of dust. Your steps are strewn
of dead, as withered leaves mark in the night
the road of a specter. Tomorrow the momentary dream of bravery is
finished; what terrified thousands of men has disappeared. The
midge, carried on its smoke-colored wings, sings on the
let us shrub its hymn of triumph, and insult your glory which is not
more than an empty word.

OSSIAN.


Antonia had lived like this for two months among the
brigands of Duino, without his condition having changed, without his having
given hope. She had only regained some strength, and
she liked to come and breathe the evening air at her window on the
sea.


One day, none of the people who served her had appeared
of her. It was the first time this had happened; but she doesn't
barely noticed. The sound of the cannon roaring around
Duino occupied him more, because the emotion he caused him was
often repeated. Desiring to see her companions, she went downstairs
the grand staircase, went through the halls and vestibules, and
found the castle deserted. The cannon was getting closer, and each shot
was followed by a rumor similar to that of the storm. Antonia
went upstairs, opened her window and looked at the sea.
large number of small vessels or nacelles similar to those
fishermen, who seemed to surround the foot of the fortress.


All these impressions were quite vivid at first, but they
quickly faded away. Night had fallen, the air was
serene, the calm waves, the sky populated with myriads
shining stars, as in the night when the boat
d'Antonia had been arrested on the Istrian coast on leaving
lagoons. She took pleasure in looking at him for some time.


However the noise she had heard increased behind
her in a threatening way. She thought she could hear a click
of swords, curses, groans, which made way,
from moment to moment, to a dead silence. She was too
unhappy to fear, if she had had the use of her reason,
for his fate did not appear likely to change for the worse; But
she does not live in the disaster that was looming that the danger
to suffer, and the complaints that hit his ear
gave a terrible idea of ​​the pains to which she was going
be exposed.


The galleries of the castle had not been lit, and
the darkness had grown deep. She did, however, and
slipped along the dark walls, following them from the
hand. When she was at the top of the stairs, she listened. Lessons
were full of armed men who spoke confusedly.


We were no longer fighting.


The butt of the rifles resounded alone as they fell on the flagstones of the
paved.


Suddenly she heard a horrible tumult, in the midst of which
arose the name of Jean Sbogar. A pursued man rushed into
the stairs, and passed her like lightning. A few
torches began to shine on the first few steps. The
bayonets clashed. The stone steps resounded
under the footsteps of the soldiers. Antonia ran to her room; and, in y
returning home, it seemed to her that she was being named in a hollow voice.


 " Who's calling me? - she said, trembling.


- It is I, - replied Jean Sbogar, - do not be afraid. Farewell
forever. "


He had approached the window, and already the troops who were
his research filled the opposite end of the gallery.


The thief came back to Antonia, and grabbed her.


"It's me, it's me," he said; - goodbye forever! "


Antonia felt a vague feeling of horror and tenderness
that she did not understand.


Sbogar shuddered.


He pressed her with one of his arms to his heart.


“Antonia, dear Antonia! - he cried; - goodbye forever!
Oh! for the last time, more than this minute in all
centuries! Antonia, dear Antonia! "


Her veil had fallen, but Antonia could not see her face.
She was touching him, she had felt the fire of his breath. The same
instant the thief's lips clung to his, and their
imprinted a kiss which spread in Antonia's senses a
unknown intoxication, a devouring pleasure which partook of the sky and
from hell.


 “Profanation or sacrilege! - said Sbogar. - You are my mistress and
 my wife, and may the world perish now! "


Speaking these words, he set her down on the high step that
climbed up to the window, and rushed into the sea.


The soldiers had arrived with their torches. They were astonished
not to see the thief, and asked Antonia if she had
preview.


"Peace, - she said to them, applying her finger to her mouth, -
he was the first to go to the nuptial bed; - and There you go, -
she continued showing the pancake he had left
feet - here is her wedding present. "




XVII


The one whom the angel then showed me was mounted on a pale horse,
and dragged all the living after him. It was called DEATH.

APOCALYPSE.


French troops had just entered the provinces
Venetian. The first care of the generals was to purge this country
brigands who infested it, and who could become for a
the most formidable auxiliary opposing army. It is this pattern that
had determined the attack on Duino Castle. Almost all the
bandits perished with weapons in hand. We could not have alive
that a small number of them, that serious injuries were coming
to put out of action or which had rushed into the sea,
and which must have been collected by these pods that Antonia
had observed. It was assumed that Jean Sbogar would be among
them; but as his features were not known to brigands
themselves, nothing could fix on this point the doubts of their
winners. Fitzer, Ziska and most of the leading
captain, were dead by his side before he entered the
castle.


The prisoners were sent to Mantua to be tried there. We
preferred this rather remote town to any other, because it
put them out of the reach and attempts of their
accomplices, and that her happy military position defended her
a helping hand. Antonia was driven there in a car
separate. Her state of dementia being obvious, she was confided
in a hospital in the care of a doctor famous for the progress
that he had done for the knowledge and treatment of this
sad illness.


His efforts were crowned with disastrous success. Antonia heals,
and understood the full extent of his misfortune.


During the time she had spent in this house, she did not
ceased to be the object of those pious solicitations whose religion
only charity can teach the secret. As she gets there
was made known, and his mind cleared of the darkness that
obscured it had taken up this binding charm which chains the
heart, she had excited around her, and especially among
holy girls who served this hospice, a feeling more
sweet as pity.


She was loved.


As no affection recalled her in the world, and this
peaceful asylum was now everything for her, it was easy for her to
get used to the idea of ​​ending your life there. A little later she
would have been forced to do so.


Some steps to return to his great possessions remained
unnecessary. Greedy collaterals, who arrived after the army,
had declared the death of Mme Alberti, had assumed the
his own and seized his heritage. They were
powerful. This plunder made them rich. Claims
Antonia could not be heard. She was no longer in the eyes
men but an orphan without name and without confession. This was the
least of his misfortunes, and his heart felt it only
thinking of the good she could have done in her new kind
of life if she had brought there the resources of opulence. His
jewelry was at least sufficient for her dowry and the distribution of
alms which were to make known to the poor that he was
one more benefactress came to the Sainte-Marie hospital.


The day of his profession, long delayed because of its extreme
weakness, had finally arrived, when two henchmen came to call her
in the name of justice.


The investigation of the trial of the brigands was completed. They had
were sentenced to death, forty in number, but nothing
proved that Jean Sbogar was among them, and the terror of this name
formidable still hovered over the Venetian provinces, where it
alone could rally new bands as dangerous as the
first.


In this uncertainty, we remembered the mad girl who
had been found at Duino Castle, and that all the evidence
agreed to present as the only object that had ever
touched the implacable ferocity of Jean Sbogar. We thought she did
would undoubtedly recognize among his accomplices if he was with
them, and that his first movement would indicate it in a way
certain; that's why we thought it appropriate to do it
place in the great courtyard of the prisons, when the condemned
would go there for the last time.


Antonia was dressed in her novitiate habit; her hair
were already tied under the blindfold of virgins, whose complexion
pale erased the whiteness: two hospitable sisters
accompanied him. Almost unable to support herself, she
was leaning on the arm of one of them; his hand was fixed on
the other's shoulder, and his head fell on his chest.


Soon a strange noise was heard; it was the exclamation
of a horrible impatience which finally saw itself satisfied: she
looked up and thought he saw something extraordinary;
but her sight did her badly. A judicial officer who does
saw her made her take a few steps forward: she saw more
distinctly, without understanding what she was seeing; they were
men whose hideous costume grieved her with terror, and who
advanced in a single line in front of a line of soldiers. Their
steps were measured, their stations frequent. To each of them
she felt her dreadful anxiety growing; finally she was
struck with a frightful illusion, and thought to fall prey to
delirium from which she had just been saved.


It was him.


It was this painting that had inspired him with such deep terror in
Venice, when Lothario's head appeared in a mirror above
of his red schall.

She stepped forward on her own to convince or to undeceive her
eyes; his physiognomy had the same character. He was wrapped
a dress or coat of the same color.


It was him. “Lothario! She cried in a heartbreaking voice,
rushing towards him.


Lothario turned away and recognized her.


“Lothario! »She said, opening a passage through the
sabers and bayonets, for she conceived he was going to die.


“No, no, - he replied, - I am Jean Sbogar!


- Lothario! Lothario!


- Jean Sbogar! - he repeated forcefully.


- Jean Sbogar! - cried Antonia. - O my God! ..... ”and his heart was
broke.


She was on the ground, motionless; she had stopped breathing.


One of the minions lifted his head with the tip of his saber, and he
let hit the pavement, abandoning it to its weight.


"This young girl is dead, - he said .....


- Dead, - resumed Jean Sbogar, looking at her fixedly. -
Let's walk! "